# Introduction

Today’s Peace Corps Volunteers are helping people in developing countries take part in the digital and technological revolution that many in the western world take for granted.

They are bridging the digital divide by teaching students and teachers to effectively use computers and the Internet for education, helping local entrepreneurs to create web sites to market their goods around the world, helping extend the reach of healthcare services, and training counterparts to use data for decision-making.

Peace Corps Volunteers have long been on the cutting edge of finding ways for their communities and counterparts to leverage technology for as long as Peace Corps has been around—through the decades that span everything from ham radio and television to telecenters to computers labs now to mobile phones and open data.

This Digital Peace Corps Reader is an effort to compile just a sampling of this effort by Volunteers over the years.

In looking at Volunteer ICT activities through the lens of news clippings, press releases, magazines, and through Volunteer blogs themselves, we gain a sense of how digital technologies play a critical and sweeping role in carrying out Peace Corps mission around the world.

In turn, by appreciating the effort to date, we will also be able to move confidently into the future when it comes to effectively embracing new ideas, innovations, knowledge, and technologies.

-Gabriel Krieshok, ICT4D Program Specialist



# Table of Contents

1. Peace Corps Times and History
2. Blogs
3. News
4. Worldview Magazine
5. Partners
6. Volunteers
7. Alumni



===== Peace Corps Times and History =====

[Many Peace Corps Times, Annual Reports, and other historical PDF documents are available as image-only.]

Peace Corps Times is the in-house publication that Peace Corps sends out to Volunteers and staff in the field. Over the years, it has also been called 'Peace Corps News' and 'The Volunteer.'

Peace Corps launched its IT Sector in 2000, but as you will see, the efforts of Volunteers thinking creatively and critically about how to leverage Information and Communication Technologies in their work goes back to the very roots of the agency.



# Globalization, Information Technology, and the Peace Corps in the 21st Century
June 7, 2000
Remarks by Mark Schneider, Director, Peace Corps
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20021029105456/http://wwics.si.edu/news/speeches/schneider.htm

*Mark Schneider has served as director of the Peace Corps since the end of 1999. He has already been to many of the countries being served by Peace Corps volunteers and has given the organization several new priorities, including and especially dealing with the AIDS epidemic in Africa and bringing information technology to the poorest nations.*

*Mr. Schneider was himself a Peace Corps volunteer from 1966 to 1968, assigned to work on community development projects in San Salvador.*

I am delighted to be here to give you an update on the Peace Corps and how the men and women who serve as Peace Corps volunteers are helping people meet the 21st century development challenges.

When President Kennedy established the Peace Corps by Executive Order on March 1, l961, he said, "We have, in this country, an immense reservoir of . . . men and women anxious to sacrifice their energies and time and toil to the cause of world peace and human progress."

Today, nearly forty years later, the Peace Corps has nearly 7,000 volunteers who maintain that same spirit of service and idealism working in seventy-seven countries around the world. Peace Corps volunteers are serving as teachers in Africa, Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and the Pacific Islands. They are helping farmers in Latin America learn about -- and benefit from -- sustainable agricultural practices. Peace Corps volunteers are working with women to obtain small loans from village banks to start their own businesses. And they are helping local health care workers promote health and nutrition in their communities.

At the same time, Peace Corps volunteers are making an enormous contribution to how the people of many developing nations see and think about America. I think the former American ambassador to Guinea put it best when he wrote the following cable to the State Department two years ago. "When I presented my credentials to President Conte," Ambassador Tibor Nagy wrote, "my prepared remarks included a brief mention of all USG activities in Guinea. In his extemporaneous response, Conte launched into spirited and effusive praise for Peace Corps volunteers and their work in Guinea." The ambassador said that for many people in Africa, "Peace Corps volunteers are the real American ambassadors, not whoever runs the embassy in the capital . . . The fact is that most people on this continent form their opinions about America and Americans from their exposure to volunteers."

I have had similar experiences. On my recent trip to West Africa, I was somewhat taken aback by the frequency with which prime ministers, cabinet ministers, and even the Vice President of Ghana asked me if I knew a particular volunteer who had taught them English or math or had lived in their village one or two decades earlier. The success of the Peace Corps in conveying who we are as a people was expressed in the comments of these leaders and of the local teachers, farmers, and micro-entrepreneurs I met.

Indeed, the best part of my job is the opportunity I have to visit with volunteers and their counterparts and neighbors at their sites. And believe me, it is an inspiration to see the ingenuity, creativity, and innovation that today's volunteers are bringing to their jobs, as well as the lasting impact they have on the lives of other people.

Since January, I have visited volunteers in nine countries in Central America, Central Asia, West Africa, and Eastern Europe. I have to admit that the first trip to Central America also permitted me to visit the barrio in El Salvador, where my wife, Susan, and I served together as Peace Corps volunteers. Volunteers now are helping El Salvador turn an eight-year-old peace accord into a new national future. It was a very moving experience to go back to that community and see some of the people who had influenced our lives. Much had changed in our barrio over the last thirty-two years, but the small bridge that we helped the community build across a ravine was still there, and a new generation of children now cross it every day to reach their school. As the Peace Corps approaches its fortieth anniversary, our volunteers are finding solutions to contemporary problems that can accelerate the pace of development.

For instance, volunteers are serving in the new republics of the former Soviet Union, where they are teaching business principles and helping entrepreneurs and small businesses make the difficult transition from state-run economies to those based on free market principles. And they are working with local governments, which are so crucial to the democratic experience. Peace Corps volunteers are working with communities in dozens of countries to protect biodiversity at the local level so that future generations can experience sustainable economic growth. In Honduras, they are helping local governments and communities develop plans and systems to mitigate the tragic effects that natural disasters, such as Hurricane Mitch, have on the country's development. And in Africa, they are collaborating with USAID, international agencies, grassroots organizations, schools, and health groups to help eradicate polio and prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, which is not only undermining national development, but is also, in my view, the dominant humanitarian challenge confronting the world today.

These are some of the areas we are targeting today as ways to accelerate development. But as we enter the 21st century, there is an even broader challenge that developing countries face, and one that Peace Corps volunteers are uniquely positioned to help them address. The challenge is globalization, an issue that is now at the center of the debate about how the "new economy" affects people in the poorest countries.

The expansion in international trade, the unnerving instantaneous, 24-hour movement of capital, and the never-ending news day are realities. The test is whether globalization also can be harnessed to foster greater international solidarity and a greater sense of community among all peoples, whether all people will share in the benefits. I believe Peace Corps volunteers can play a role in answering that question. I believe we can help make globalization "personal" and "local" by bringing the benefits of the information revolution into the hands of the students, the health workers, the campesinos, the women's groups, the indigenous artisans cooperatives, and the teachers with whom volunteers live and work.

Moises Naim, the editor of Foreign Policy, recently wrote, "The l990s began in Berlin and ended in Seattle" where a crowd sought "to rebuild walls that might shield them from the ills unleashed by 'globalization.'" On the one hand, to explain the attack on globalization, Naim pointed to some of the ways that economic reforms had failed to achieve all of their objectives. He cited the ten emerging economies that endured financial crises in the l990s, the flight of capital and jobs, and the evidence of increasing inequity and unremitting poverty that force three billion people to live on two dollars per day.

On the other hand, Naim also noted the progress that has occurred in parallel with the increasing integration and globalization of the world's economies, such as the expansion of world trade, a sharp reduction in the hyper-inflation that plagued many countries in the 1980s, a booming U.S. economy, lower tariffs on industrial goods, and the ability of those same emerging economies to recover more quickly from financial crises than ever before.

But while we can debate the pros and cons of globalization, I believe that there is a consensus on one key point. Virtually every current international development expert, from the most conservative member of the IMF to the most liberal NGO, agrees that current levels of inequity and poverty in the developing world are unacceptable.

The World Bank Development Report this year found that the richest third of countries achieved about a 50 percent increase in their per capita GDP from l970 to l995; but the per capita GDP of those in the poorest third showed virtually no increase. Even though we can point to important gains in social conditions, too many people in too many countries still live in extreme poverty.

There is now broad agreement that more and better human capital investment, such as devoting more resources to quality education for girls as well as boys and improving access to primary health care, are vital to achieve sustainable levels of economic growth.

Experts on both sides of the debate, I am pleased to note, increasingly are calling on governments to be more accountable and democratic, to manage natural resources in ways that protect our children's economic future, and to give the poor greater access to credit for micro and small businesses, infrastructure, title to property, and legal protection.

One reflection of the new policy consensus are the conclusions of the 2000 World Development Report that after fifty years of development experience, the four key lessons learned are: "First, macroeconomic stability is an essential prerequisite for achieving the growth needed for development. Second, growth does not trickle down; development must address human needs directly." Here, let me add that this is a fundamental and crucial change from the diagnosis at the outset of the 90's. "Third, no one policy will trigger development. Fourth, institutions matter; sustained development should be rooted in processes that are socially inclusive and responsive to changing circumstances." Again, this recognition of the key role of government particularly with respect to local government and the rule of law, constitute welcome additions to the previous prescriptions for economic development.

Moreover, it is not just the experts who are concerned about the effects of globalization on the world's poorest people. The Program on International Policy Attitudes at the University of Maryland just released a study on how ordinary Americans view the complexities of globalization, and it contains some very interesting conclusions. Let me quote just one point. "Most Americans," the study said, "perceive poor countries as not getting a net benefit from international trade, and they support giving preferential trade treatment to poor countries. Very strong majorities believe that the U.S. has a moral obligation to promote development in poor countries and that doing so ultimately would serve US economic interests."

Recognizing the importance of poverty reduction and enhancing equity, however, is one thing, changing policies, offering incentives, transferring resources and knowledge is another.

The growing consensus of the need for those changes is a major step forward. That consensus plays to Peace Corps' strengths. Peace Corps traditionally has worked at the local level helping communities satisfy human needs, strengthening grassroots institutions, and transferring the skills and knowledge for sustainable development.

In the 21st century, I am convinced that Peace Corps is even better prepared and better positioned than virtually any other agency or institution to bring information technology to the task of poverty reduction. To be sure, technology is no panacea -- it will not solve all of the problems that confront people in the developing world. Yet if the poor are unable to participate in the information technology revolution that we now take for granted, the equity gap will widen even further.

It is within this context of coping with the reality of globalization that Peace Corps is launching its own 21st century e-initiative. The World Bank, USAID, the UN, and others are teaming up with the information giants in an ambitious effort to create the information technology portals through which connections can be made to the world of e-commerce, e-knowledge, and e-systems. I believe that Peace Corps volunteers can carry the information revolution right through those portals and far beyond. Let me explain how.

Virtually every Peace Corps volunteer sworn in today is adept at using computers, integrating information technology, and accessing the Internet. In many respects, they are comparative experts when they arrive in their overseas communities. There may be 50 million Web sites, but most of the people in the developing world have never made a telephone call, much less sat in front of a computer and surfed the Internet.

Volunteers can change that. They can turn the traditional pattern of the poor getting technology last, upside down.

Let me give some examples of what our volunteers are doing right now. In Ghana, I met a young man from Seattle, who thought he was going to teach math at a high school in the capital city of Accra. The school director, however, asked him if he knew what could be done with fifteen computers that had arrived but seemed not to work. He suddenly became the director of the school's computer literacy program. For a year, he was the only teacher who taught computer operations to 1,500 students and their teachers.

In Bulgaria, I met one volunteer who helped her counterpart grassroots group acquire three computers, a modem, and a printer. Today, they are operating the computer-learning center for a host of non-governmental organizations, cooperatives and small businesses.

In Central America, I met an outstanding senior volunteer, who had spent 40 years as a marketing executive at the Goodyear tire company. He served two years as a business volunteer in Ukraine. Today, he is in his second tour and serving as a business volunteer in Guatemala, where he is working with a small company that helps Mayan women's cooperatives, in the former conflict zone, expand their markets and improve their products. He taught them how to create a Web page that now is advertising their traditional fabrics in the e-commerce marketplace.

And in the remote reaches of Kenya, a Peace Corps volunteer who is serving as a science teacher had a laptop but no electricity. So, in a classic example of Peace Corps ingenuity, he rigged some discarded solar panels to power his laptop. He was able to connect to the Internet and draw down the information he needed to improve the work plans for his fellow teachers.

These are just several examples of how volunteers are using technology to help their communities develop and prosper. These volunteers are smarter and certainly more computer savvy than I was when I was a volunteer. But we can do even more to assist Peace Corps volunteers in transferring the extraordinary skills they possess in information technology. The transfer of knowledge must be sustainable. It must be part of a project owned by the local community. And it must be a tool that does not separate the volunteer from the community but, instead, offers the community a window to the world's bounty of knowledge. We have launched the Peace Corps e-initiative to expand the role that our volunteers play in bringing the power of information technology to the task of poverty reduction. The key elements are the following:

1. We will build upon Peace Corps' traditional strengths of local community presence, intimate knowledge of local customs and language, and demonstrated success at grassroots project development and execution. We will enable technology projects that are financed by other organizations to become accessible to students and businesses that are not in the main square of capital cities, but beyond the end of the road in distant villages. We also are proposing to harness IT to help resource-poor communities advance their development goals in education, health, environmental protection, agriculture production and small business enterprises, and municipal development. We want volunteers to prepare projects to do just that.
2. To recruit Peace Corps volunteers with IT skills, a month ago we created a new category for Information Technology generalists and specialists. It will give computer whizzes a place to identify their skills for the first time. This also helps our overseas offices more clearly identify where and how PCVs with these skills can work in the myriad of projects out there, and specifically request them. For instance, Belize now is requesting thirty IT volunteers to lead their effort to bring computers into every primary school by 2005. The first ten volunteers arrived yesterday and twenty more are being recruited.
3. We are undertaking a massive "training of trainers" process for volunteers who are comparative experts in using information technology but not necessarily in teaching others how to use it. We also want to expand the training programs to ensure that volunteers and their counterparts become proficient in information technology teaching techniques.
4. We want to see community computer literacy centers, micro and small business web page design centers; school-based learning centers expanded by volunteers around the world. We can point to dozens of innovative uses by volunteers who have done it without support. Now we want to find ways to offer support and believe the numbers of those projects will be multiplied ten-fold. Today, I would like to challenge America's information giants to join the Peace Corps' e-initiative by contributing funds, hardware, software, and teaching modules to a Peace Corps e-Partnership Fund. The Fund will permit us to support hundreds of new volunteer information technology projects developed at the grassroots with community, NGO, small business, and local government partners.
5. Thirty years ago, my wife and I worked with our neighbors to build a bridge across a gully so that students could reach school safely. Today, this new Peace Corps e-initiative will enable volunteers to help build bridges across the digital divide to connect people in the poorest communities to the world of learning and, hopefully, to more promising futures.

In that way, we can make globalization "personal" and "local" and begin to give those who traditionally have been left on the margins of technology a link to the center of the information revolution.

Woodrow Wilson once said, "There is no cause half so sacred as the cause of a people, there is no idea so uplifting as the idea of service to humanity." The Peace Corps continues to embody those values, and I am very proud and honored to be leading the agency at this time in its history.




# White House launches technological Peace Corps
March 6, 2003
Source: http://www.itworld.com/article/2806066/data-center/white-house-launches-technological-peace-corps.html

Volunteers from U.S. companies and the federal government will soon head to the African nation of Senegal to help the country improve its technology industry and its economy, according to the White House.

On Tuesday, the White House and the U.S. Department of Commerce announced the creation of the Digital Freedom Initiative, a program designed to help developing nations grow their technology industries. Senegal, a mostly Muslim nation in West Africa, will be the first participating country in a three-year pilot program, and if the Senegalese experience is successful, the U.S. government would send volunteers to 20 countries in the following five years.

Senegal was chosen because its political leaders understand the importance of technology, and the country also has some technology infrastructure in place, said Connie Correll, senior advisor to the undersecretary of commerce for technology. The country has about 10,000 telephone centers, where residents can place phone calls, and about 200 of the centers are Internet capable, Correll said.

It also doesn't hurt that Senegal's population is mostly Muslim, as President George W. Bush faces public relations challenges with the Muslim world over his threatened war with Iraq.

"It's good foreign policy, and it’s good economic policy," Correll said of Senegal as the choice. "The country is enthusiastic about the program."

Bush has budgeted US$2 million for the program in his proposed 2004 federal budget, Correll said, but organizers expect Senegal will get another $4.5 million worth of volunteer work and computer equipment during the year. The program would send volunteers from technology and financial services companies, as well as members of the U.S. Peace Corps and other agencies, to Senegal to work with small businesses on technology issues. The program will also promote "pro-growth regulatory and legal structures."

Representatives of Hewlett-Packard Co. and Cisco Systems Inc. attended the White House program kick-off ceremony Tuesday. IBM Corp. has also expressed interest in the program, Correll said. The U.S. Department of Commerce hopes to recruit more companies to get involved. Other federal agencies involved include the U.S. Agency for International Development and the USA Freedom Corps.

The groups involved participated in the first organizational meeting Tuesday, and another meeting should happen within a couple of months, Correll said. Details about how the program will operate are still being worked out.

One of the program's missions is to help developing nations "bring people out of poverty," Correll said. "The overall goal is technology-based economic development," she added. "We're sending our human capital over to Senegal to help them develop their economy.




# Testimony by Mark L. Schneider, former Director of the Peace Corps, to the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on Enhancing the Peace Corps, Empowering Peace Corps
Volunteers and Expanding to 15,000 by its 50th anniversary
July 25, 2007
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20080202221852/http://www.senate.gov/~foreign/testimony/2007/schneidertestimony070725.pdf

I want to express my appreciation to the chairman, Senator Chris Dodd, a fellow returned Peace Corps Volunteer from my Volunteer era, for the invitation to appear before the Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Peace Corps and Narcotics Affairs this morning in support of the Peace Corps Volunteer Empowerment Act. Every one of the 187,000 Returned and serving Volunteers recognize your commitment, dedication and influence over the past four decades in support of the Peace Corps and its three goals. We all thank you for that legacy of leadership.

I also want to express my appreciation to the ranking member Senator Bob Corker and the members of the committee for the opportunity to appear here today. And although not a member of the Committee, I want to express the appreciation of the Peace Corps community for your original co-sponsor on this legislation, Senator Ted Kennedy, not only a friend of the Peace Corps, but my boss for nearly six years a long time ago.

My wife and I served as Peace Corps Volunteers in El Salvador 40 years ago, and those two years in a small barrio on the outskirts of San Salvador were the most demanding and the most rewarding of our lives. I also had the rare and enormously satisfying privilege of serving as Director of the Peace Corps for the last two years of the Clinton Administration. I have worked in USAID, the State Department, in international organizations, and now with the International Crisis Group, a field-based non-profit organization that analyzes and reports on the causes of conflict in some 60 countries.

I have been able to visit Volunteers in dozens of countries around the world, including on trips since 9/11. I can tell this Committee with absolute conviction that the Peace Corps is the single most cost effective investment this country makes in pursuit of its foreign policy goals—in helping other communities build their knowledge and their institutions, in conveying to the world around us who we really are as a people and a country—which is more essential today than ever, even more than it was during the Cold War, and in broadening this nation’s awareness of the global community.

That is why I am convinced that this legislation contains three critical elements to enable the Peace Corps to double in size to 15,000 Volunteers by the time it celebrates its 50th anniversary on 1 March 2011.

Those elements are first, authorizing the necessary funds; second, empowering Volunteers which will mean better management, improved programming and site selection, safer and more satisfied Volunteers and third, removal of financial, medical, and bureaucratic obstacles to recruiting senior Volunteers.

I also will suggest one other provision and that is to aggressively pursue additional people of color as Peace Corps Volunteers. We have been creeping up to 16 per cent of our Volunteers coming from ethnic and racial minority groups. We can do better and I simply would urge additional targeted steps to do so—including expanding Master’s International and the Peace Corps fellows’ programs at historically black and Hispanic colleges and universities.

Show me the money: The first indispensable element in the bill is its authorization of the necessary growth in funding in FY2008, through FY2011 to permit the Peace Corps to reach that goal. It is a goal that President Clinton enunciated and that President Bush has supported. Simply stated, the resources have not matched the rhetoric. This bill provides the authorization. I hope that the committee also will act to see that the first year’s appropriations of $336 million, as passed by the House of Representatives in the FY2008 State-Foreign Operations Appropriations bill will be the final mark when the measure goes to the President for his signature.

As you know there are nearly 20 countries today that want the Peace Corps to establish programs. As we saw after 9/11 when there was jump in Peace Corps applications, if we communicate to potential Volunteer communities out across this nation that we have opportunities for them to serve, they will come.

Empower Volunteers: The second element enabling the Peace Corps to expand with better management, better programs, and greater Volunteer satisfaction which I want to endorse is the array of measures in Title II to empower Volunteers.

I would emphasize that we are not starting at zero. Just as an example—there is a mandate for Volunteer Advisory Committees (VACs) in each country in section 202 and then a requirement for staff to listen to them. I cannot think of a measure that makes more sense. Most but not all countries already have established VACs. ‘Best practices’ reports of the Inspector General on safety issues have cited their importance. They should be required.

Empowering Volunteers is crucial because the Peace Corps is about Volunteers, not staff. The role of staff in Washington and in the field is to find ways to enable Volunteers to succeed. By the way, most staff—many of whom are returned Volunteers—would agree.

If you look over the years at the Peace Corps Volunteer Surveys, which now are conducted every two years, and ask Volunteers about every aspect of their pre-service, training, program, satisfaction, and concerns, the strongest link exists between two elements of a Volunteer’s experience, an adequate site where they live and work and an adequate program for them to contribute their energies and skills.

I have personal experience on selecting sites, since my wife and I extended for several months specifically to survey all of the existing communities in a public health program to check with Volunteers on potential living quarters and work conditions. As Director, I urged that Volunteers be part of the process of evaluating which existing sites and programs should be expanded or replaced. The legislation would mandate that requirement.

The other provisions of the Title II relating to training curriculum and staff performance also deserve support.

Let me just add again, that these provisions build on the lessons already learned from Volunteer statements in every Volunteer survey over the past several years, as well as from the thoughtful individual Volunteer experiences that you are going to hear about from my good friend Chuck Ludlum and his wife, Paula Hirschoff. They should be commended for their strong commitment to the Peace Corps, displayed during their current second Volunteer tour in Senegal, their research on parts of this bill and their dedication to continued improvement of the Peace Corps.

Let me note there is good news with respect to some of these issues in the current 2006 Volunteer Survey, and in the last Volunteer Survey when I was director. Both show a continuing worldwide global satisfaction rate on the part of Volunteers that I suspect would be hard to match in any organization.

There were more than 80 individual questions with about a dozen choices and then open- ended questions and nearly 75% of all currently serving Volunteers responded, which is pretty amazing. In 1998, it was the same, slightly lower in 1999. A quick listing of some of the results may be particularly relevant.

Of all Volunteers who responded:

- 92% said they definitely intended to complete their 2-year term. In 1999, it was 93%.
- 80% said the host country would benefit if the Peace Corps program were maintained or expanded.
- 94% found it rewarding personally.
- 85% would probably or definitely join again; in 1999, it was 88%, with the same percentages saying they would recommend to friends.
- 95% said they had been moderately, considerably or exceptionally successful in terms of the Peace Corps second goal of helping people from other cultures better understand America.

However, the surveys also provide additional support for the empowerment provisions of the legislation because the views of Volunteers on staff support continue to be somewhat discouraging. A strong majority were adequately, considerably or exceptionally satisfied with staff support, but somewhere between 16% and 28% were dissatisfied with regard to site selection, job assignment, and administrative support, and even greater unhappiness with respect to technical support and project feedback. That is too high a negative review. In each of these areas, bringing greater Volunteer input into decision-making will strengthen Peace Corps management and programming.

On the positive side, the most satisfaction with staff is in relation to safety and health which demonstrates not only that the Peace Corps is committing additional resources but also that there is more Volunteer input.

I also would add that I believe that the digital Peace Corps will enable Volunteers to get more of that support from each other by tapping into the best practices in their country and region and the Peace Corps now and in the past.

Finally, I would view the provisions of the bill (Section 11, 102) that seek to expand Volunteer access to seed funding for their projects through a Peace Corps fund or by obtaining donations or grants from various sources as part of the empowerment process.

Again, these provisions build on existing programs such as the Small Project Assistance Fund at USAID—but in the current survey, 41 per cent of Volunteers had not used it; the Peace Corps Partnership fund, but 44% had not used it; and on “other” resources, including family friends, service clubs, churches, etc. Here I believe it is important to note that Peace Corps Volunteers have been soliciting anyone they can wherever they can for a long time if they thought it would help implement community projects. I can recall wandering around San Salvador with the community council members from Colonia San Juan Bosco to solicit funds for the community newspaper we were starting.

In some individual instances, Volunteers may not have been encouraged to seek outside resources—although I believe that is relatively rare--and there also is a constraint that Volunteers do not want to be seen as “daddy warbucks”. These provisions encourage the use of project funding but do not make it mandatory, which would be a mistake.

The provisions with respect to protecting the rights of Peace Corps Volunteers also are positive and worthy of support.

**Recruiting senior Volunteers**: Removal of obstacles to recruiting experienced Volunteers is the third element in the bill which will help move us toward the goal of doubling the size of the Peace Corps. The current Peace Corps Director, returned PCV Ronald Tschetter, has undertaken an initiative in this area and the legislation hopefully will be seen as a way to advance the common objective of increasing experienced Volunteers, On the health side, while reforms to the medical screening process are important to every incoming applicant, they are critical with respect to senior Volunteers. I think the specific provisions provide for greater transparency, greater due process, and greater fairness. By publishing the medical screening guidelines and process with full disclosure, enabling changes to be proposed, permitting appeals, and reimbursing for medical tests required by the Peace Corps, the system will improve.

The non-discriminatory treatment of retirees who serve as Peace Corps Volunteers in terms of their ability to resume medical coverage from institutions in addition to the federal government should be pursued. And the study of the costs of extending continuing coverage to Volunteers following completion of service from one to six months also is desirable.
On the financial side, the proposals again would go far to encouraging seniors to join the Peace Corps.

Finally, I would simply support the effort to enhance the third goal through expanding funding for programs like World Wise Schools, for supporting efforts to enable non- profit organizations with returned Volunteers to conduct programs that link their home communities with their former communities and with the global community. I would urge, however, that the funding for this grant program be in addition to the funds needed each year to meet the target for doubling the size of the Peace Corps. I also think that NPCA president Kevin Quigley, also an RPCV, will have valuable insights in this area.

Mr. Chairman, I was the Peace Corps director on the 40th anniversary of the speech that then Presidential candidate John F. Kennedy made at the University of Michigan on October 13, 1960. I traveled to the steps of the Michigan Union. Although his speech began at 2 a.m., I was convinced to start mine at midnight to an audience gathered to commemorate that event, including some of the students who had been there 40 years earlier.

President Kennedy challenged young people, and increasingly older people as well, to serve our country and the cause of peace in a new way. His idea for a new type of service appealed to Americans who wanted to lift the hopes of people in developing countries and to strengthen international understanding in a world divided by the Cold War. Our world today is at least as divided in this age of extremism and terrorism. That is why the Peace Corps remains important.

The Peace Corps has grown to symbolize our country’s enduring commitment to helping people in developing countries help themselves. Some 7800 Volunteers serve in 73 countries, and in virtually every sector of development.

Because millions of individuals awaken each day to poverty, hunger, and ill health, Peace Corps Volunteers still are needed at the core of our work—teaching in classrooms, carrying health and nutrition messages to distant villages, and working with farmers to find more sustainable ways of growing food.

Today’s Peace Corps Volunteers also are responding to new challenges. They are working with communities of Africa to prevent the spread of AIDS, a disease that has inflicted a tragic toll on the people of Africa. As director I imposed a requirement that all Volunteers then serving in Africa and all new Volunteers would be trained to be HIV/AIDS prevention educators to help their communities confront this pandemic. It marked the first time that the Peace Corps mobilized every Volunteer to join in a continent-wide campaign against a specific disease. I am pleased that this Administration has built on that foundation and actually expanded the number of Volunteers working on HIV/AIDS as a primary assignment. Volunteers have achieved innovative and countrywide impact on expanding prevention education —some with public health training were working as health educators but others, whose primary assignment was in education and agriculture and small business, also used their ideas, know-how and determination in ways I am convinced have saved lives.

Today’s Peace Corps Volunteers also are helping people in developing countries take part in the information technology revolution that all of us now take for granted. They are bridging the digital divide by helping local entrepreneurs create web sites to market their goods over the Internet, helping extend health data bases and training teachers to develop computer literacy programs. That is why the provisions of this legislation to promote the digital Peace Corps internally are so essential. I am convinced that there can be a vast expansion of public/private partnerships with AOL, Hewlett Packard, Google, and others in the dot.com community. We had initial grants of technical support and equipment worth more than a million dollars to use information technology when I was director. That program clearly can be expanded.

What has not changed about the Peace Corps over the last 45 years, and what unites Volunteers of the Kennedy era with Volunteers of the new millennium, is the spirit of service and the same goal of contributing to world peace and international understanding by fulfilling the three goals of the Peace Corps:

- helping people in developing countries address social and economic needs;
- promoting a better understanding of Americans among the people they serve and;
- “bringing the world back home” to promote greater understanding by Americans of the world, of the people who share that world with us, what the face each day and how their lives intersect with our own.



===== Blogs =====

Peace Corps Volunteers serve at the 'last mile' of service to counterparts and communities around the world. This unique immersion has served as a source of inspiration for many thinkers and writers all thinking of the various ways in which Volunteers could help facilitate crossing the 'digital divide' in their communities.

Volunteers can use ICT to change the world around them, and these are just a few of the stories and articles that show how that's been theorized, carried out, and ought to be approached in the future.



# Electronic Peace Corps
By David H. Rothman
February 7, 1994
Source: http://www.africa.upenn.edu/comp*articles/electronic*peace*16108.html

An Electronic Peace Corps? Back in '84 after I proposed the idea in the Washington Post and elsewhere, the planet was not quite ready-- despite the enthusiasm of people ranging from William F. Buckley Jr. and Arthur C. Clarke to a former worldwide training director for the existing Peace Corps. Now, however, when U.S. policymakers at last can tell potato chips apart from the silicon variety, the time may have come.

In most writings on the EPC I've described a variety of applications, ranging from business to engineering. Still, medical uses are my favorite. Below I'm reproducing an article from the November 1987 issue of International Health News (published by the National Council for International Health). Feel free to spread around the material online *without* my permission. At the end of this posting, I'll include an update.

Lest someone point out the obvious, I'll emphasize that many, many fine groups in the U.S. and elsewhere--for example, the Association for Progressive Communications--are already doing EPC- style work. Quite apparent! But so much more needs to be done and the proposed organization cold greatly expand existing efforts, working either within the Peace Corps or USAID, or separately. Too, lest I come across as US centric, I'll also emphasize I'm gung-ho on EPC equivalents. The more money the U.S. spends on high tech for LDCs, the greater will be interest elsewhere.

***

## It's time to consider an electronic Peace Corps

A deadly, unknown disease is killing hundreds of people in a steamy jungle in the year 2000.

The illness baffles the local public health officials. They can't determine whether the disease is spread through food water, sex, insects, or some other means. Fear grows. The sickness might even become another AIDS, a menace not just to Third World countries but also to developed countries like the United States.

Now, however, in the year 2000, leading scientists often know of mystery diseases within days of the first local reports. So they enjoy a head start in fighting this one.

The reason? An American agency called the Electronic Peace Corps (EPC).

Supervised by a cadre of experienced professionals, Peace Corps- style volunteers are revolutionizing Third World communications. They use computers, radios, and other electronic means to boost health and general living standards in developing countries and perhaps even save lives in developed ones.

Some EPC volunteers work in the field. Others, however, don't leave their regular jobs in their home towns. They share their medical and technical knowledge via global computer networks.

Third World officials can dial up computerized lists to select the right EPC volunteers for their needs of the moment. And time zones don't matter. Computer messages remain in electronic mailboxes thousands of miles away, ready to be picked up at the recipients' leisure.

A real EPC does not exist. But it could. Already the basic plan has won support from such people as Roger Nicholson, former worldwide training director of the Peace Corps; Arthur C. Clarke, father of the communications satellite; and conservative columnist William F. Buckley Jr., who was keen on the idea as far back as 1984 ("a concrete proposal available to anyone running for president of the United States--or for re-election").

The EPC concept is simple:

Use cellular radio technology, computers, and other electronics to speed up the flow of technical and medical information from country to country and within countries. The EPC could be part of the existing Peace Corps or else be an independent agency. Other nations, moreover, might want to start their own.

Here is how the EPC could help fight the hypothetical epidemic and otherwise aid the Third World.

## Way No. 1: Improve Telephone Service

No, we aren't talking about wiring up every tropical village or placing a Princess phone in every shelter. Nor need we string cables across every river and mountain range.

Rather, an EPC would aid public health efforts and other development-related activities through the same cellular radio technology that real estate salesmen and doctors employ to stay in touch with their offices from their BMWs. Faced with a possible epidemic, regional health workers could consult with the most knowledgeable professionals in their countries and even abroad.

Public health would be just one beneficiary of better phone service. Agricultural organizations, for instance, could more easily keep track of crop prices, and merchants or government officials could better coordinate food distribution.

## Way No. 2: Promote Use of Computerized Databases, Expert Systems, and Electronic Spreadsheets

Learning of the strange symptoms, doctors in the affected country's capital could consult a computer database--to confirm that the malady was indeed a new one and to compare it with known illnesses. Computer also could help keep them abreast of new medical trends. A single CD ROM disk, for instance, similar to the kind that stores music, might offer the equivalent of hundreds of issues of medical journals. Imagine the boon to doctors and medical libraries unable to afford normal subscriptions. CD ROMs would be one way to reduce the expense of international computer connections when making massive data searches.

Guided by CD ROMs and expert systems--computers that respond to queries and offer advice the way a human expert might--the Third World doctors could develop some preliminary responses to the epidemic.

As in the United States, computers also could streamline the keeping of records and perform other tasks ranging from the analysis of laboratory results to the monitoring of patients under anesthesia to the streamlining of hospitals' finances. If nothing else, consider the African nation that, aided by electronic spreadsheets, got its budget done on schedule for the first time in years.

## Way No. 3: Improve International Communications-- Especially the Computer Kind

The gadgetry exists to "mail" computer messages even to Third World capitals with noisy phone lines.

As far back as 1982, Jerome Glenn, a leading U.S. pioneer in computer communications with poorer countries, was sending messages out of Haiti via a suitcase-sized computer terminal. He later institutionalized what he was doing. Thanks to the network he created-- called CARINET-- an African potter can get information within a day on how to build electrical insulators. Similarly, Jamaican farmers may receive advice to plant peppers, not pumpkins, if they want good prices in the U.S.

What's more, since Glenn's pioneer days, international computer communications have been growing steadily cheaper.

For $1, I can send 1,000-word computer letters to a friend in Southeast Asia. He pays more. Just the same, "E-Mail" costs are steadily declining, and an Electronic Peace Corps could allow even the most impecunious public health organizations in the Third World to communicate with major ones in the West.

Computers, of course, wouldn't be the only medium. The EPC might also transmit detailed technical information at times via facsimile. What's more, phone conversations on occasion might be most efficient and add a personal touch. Even television might be used when appropriate; for instance, to show surgical procedures.

No matter what the media, a far-reaching network of public health officials would help save lives by:

- Quickly alerting researchers and decision makers of developing epidemics, not just of their existence but of important details. AIDS, of course, is the classical example here. Serious research in the U.S. might have started earlier if better global communications had helped Westerners grasp one of the more important details: that AIDS could threaten general populations, not just "high-risk" groups such as intravenous drug users and homosexuals. Granted, technology alone isn't the answer. Computer nets cannot substitute for improved cooperation between countries; all they can do is make it easier. In this case, epidemiologists with organizations such as the Centers for Disease Control might routinely track even minor anomalies (involving relative few victims) lest they become AIDS-sized threats that leapt across oceans in an era of jet travel.
- Speeding up research. How frustrating that epidemiologists, cancer researchers and others are at the mercy of post offices. Medical journals and letters between researchers may arrive weeks late or not at all. And telex is often too expensive. With funding from Apple Computer and McDonnell-Douglas Tymnet network, Baylor University Medical Center and the Pan American Health Organization started a cancer net with connections to five Latin countries. U.S. institutions should be doing more of the same. The benefits can be two-way. The more countries and scientists involved, the more likely it is that researchers can gain fresh insights based on unusual cases. This isn't even to mention the possibility of the spread of new diseases to the U.S.
- Sending Third World doctors the very latest information to use on individual patients. Would that the physicians be able to do this routinely. Usually there won't be time or money. But in special cases, a diagnosis from afar might save or prolong life.

Along with the EPC proposal, I'll offer caveats.

First off, the organization ideally will emphasize basics such as health and agriculture and not wander off into, say, cultural exchanges. The EPC mustn't be a glorified pen pal service.

**Second**, let's not spawn a giant bureaucracy overnight. The agency could start as a series of small, closely monitored pilot projects. Not all should be "in house." Why not have some run by private organizations used to operating on tight budgets? And why not tap the technical expertise of sophisticated amateur radio operators and computer hackers, many of whom still harbor the old barn-raiser spirit?

**Third**, the EPC should build on existing efforts rather than duplicate them. Perhaps it could help fund experiments such as a low- cost communications satellite project started by Volunteers in Technical Assistance to improve communications in remote parts of the world without telephone service. Also, the EPC should work hand in hand with international groups, such as the World Health Organization.

**Fourth**, computer and electronic experts should not run the EPC. Health professionals, agricultural administrators, economic development experts--they are the ones who should set the tone. The techies should serve the "end users," not the other way around.

**Fifth**, an American EPC should not only provide U.S. technical expertise, but also help Third World countries share information they develop on their own. The EPC should be a clearing house, not a Great White Father. Ideally, an American EPC would include Third World advisers or directors.

**Sixth**, the EPC should heed Roger Nicholson's warning: "Without training and spare parts, micro computers will be like the bulldozers that we send overseas, only to see them rust." The EPC should include enough volunteers in the field to reduce such possibilities.

**Seventh** and last, don't expect the EPC to replace the regular Peace Corps. Tapping out advice on his [or her] personal computer, a public health expert isn't exactly going to be able to give Asian villagers a step-by-step demonstration of water purification. For that you need a Peace Corps volunteer--plain Peace Corps, not electronic--on the scene. The EPC might be a life-saver at times, but never a global panacea. Rather it should be considered just one of many tools with which imaginative health professionals and others in international development can chip away at the problems of the Third World.

## Update, 1994

Not long ago I heard from Naren Chitty, a former diplomat who helped me refine the EPC idea, and with whom I helped pave the way for Kaypro to donate ten computers to Sri Lanka's schools in the mid-'80s. He noted the many messages speeding over the Internet between his homeland and the United States. "It was serendipitous," he said, "to discover through E-mail a thriving plant where one once planted a seed."

*That* has been the biggest change--the spread of the nets and technology in general, along with the new opportunities. The Internet is but one example. Via BBS networks, for instance, American schoolchildren can learn geography and other subjects from direct contacts with students and others abroad. And with communications costs lower than in the '80s, high-tech is a perfect medium for cultural exchanges at a mass level. Electronic libraries, moreover, are no longer quite so novel. In an era of Gopher and similar tools, people in developing countries can track down information on their own without quite so much help from the States. Most of all, computers are no longer such novelties to the elites of Sri Lanka and other developing countries. I can't cite a cyber-census of the island; but I'd suspect that the number of microcomputers at universities there is in the hundreds and perhaps the thousands, a far cry from the Kaypro era.

Sri Lanka is but one example of the proliferation of high-tech. The February issue of Wired magazine tells how, in some circles in China, 286-class computers are enshrined along with the wok and bicycle in a "pantheon of simple, ubiquitous technology."

And yet, if anything, the need is even greater today for an Electronic Peace Corps than in the 1980s. Epidemics can spread more rapidly. And the fates of Americans are more intertwined than ever with people in the Third Word, some of whom have come to our shores to escape wars and find new opportunities here. Indeed, it has been suggested, quite correctly, that some of the best participants in an EPC might be our recent immigrants and their children.

There are other changes in the idea I'd make today. Just as the existing Peace Corps is doing already, an electronic version could help Eastern Europe, not only Asia, Africa and Latin America. William Buckley speculated in 1990: "What would happen if a half-million Kaypros--I speak of the Volkswagen of personal computers--were given away--yes, given away--to Eastern Europe and to the Soviet Union? The worriers will ask whether we are playing the role of sorcerer's apprentice, giving away rudimentary instruments that can turn into monsters (with a Kaypro, Stalin might have managed to find and kill even more people). But no: the universalization of the resources of the computer can accelerate that which most needs acceleration: economic relief for 350 million people, Eastern Europeans and Russians, bankrupted by 70 years of socialism." Also, an EPC could reflect our existing Peace Corps' interest in the environment--in forestry, for example. Certainly the EPC could play in important role in monitoring and coping with pollution and other threats. In this same vein, an Electronic Peace Corps could promote Third World telecommuting. The idea, proposed years ago by a Tennessee researcher, makes infinite sense; telecommuting could reduce smog in the great cities of developing countries, lessen the threat to the ozone layer, and also encourage greater social stability. The idea wouldn't be to turn every villager into a computer-era clerk. Rather the EPC could encourage Third World societies to create new opportunities in rural areas to help staunch the flow of population into already-crowded cities. Just a small number of white-collar people in rural regions could generate service jobs for many others. The EPC could encourage developing countries to train the children of farmers for jobs they would normally find only in New Delhi, say, or Mexico City. And it could help city-based companies reach out to this new labor force through rural work centers. Moreover, it could assist rural people in establishing their own companies to provide some local employment of the white-collar variety.

What's more, in updating the Electronic Peace Corps concept, I can see a connection with the TeleRead program that I have proposed for America. TeleRead would create an affordable National Library online and drive down the costs of computers optimized for reading, writing and other serious endeavors. And the same technology could travel to the Third World, where we eventually could help countries set up libraries of their own. When I push the TeleRead concept on the Internet (available via e-mail from me--as teleread.txt, 180K), I receive inquiries not just from the States and Europe, but from remote areas of the planet. Ironically, in helping others with an EPC and TeleRead programs, we would help ourselves--by creating a new appetite for American intellectual property abroad, while benefiting from the works of people everywhere. At same time such efforts would be a wonderful carrot to encourage developing countries to respect intellectual property rights.

Another issue that arises nowadays is whether the Electronic Peace Corps should be an international agency. I've already suggested that different countries could start their own EPCs. And someday, yes, there might an international electronic peace corps, as some have proposed. But first things, first. The U.S. and other major powers would actually do the world more of a favor by starting with their own agencies and seeing which ideas worked the best. International agencies can be like ocean liners-- ponderous and hard to turn around; at this stage a fleet of speedboats would do better.

Of course, even early on, the EPCs of different countries could create ad hoc bodies to coordinate major projects in different regions of the world. And international organizations could still participate in the setting of technical standards, just as they do now.

Whatever form an American EPC takes, the 1987 headline has held up: "It's Time to Consider an Electronic Peace Corps." The term National Information Infrastructure just is not enough. As shown by the success of the Internet, we should also be thinking of a GII, a Global Information Infrastructure.



# Peace Corps Needs to Go High-Tech for Internet Age
December 7, 1999
By Harold J. Raveche, Stevens Institute of Technology
Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20130213213259/http://www.somaliawatch.org/archive/991207101.htm

**HOBOKEN, N.J.** -- As I hurried to catch my morning flight out of Dhaka, Bangladesh, I passed hundreds of children sleeping on the edge of the street, within inches of speeding vehicles. My thoughts turned to how that scene compared with the endless stories of Americans making buckets of money the dot-com way.

The chasm of technology separating the streets of Dhaka and the highways of Silicon Valley is so great as to be measured in light-years. If the New Economy has arrived, no one has informed Dhaka, where the Old Economy barely exists and where people try to survive without the basics of transportation, refrigeration or even a table on which to eat (if they have food).

Much has been written about the technology gap between the rich and poor in America. But it's nothing compared with the technology canyon that separates the United States and other developed nations from places like Bangladesh, most of Africa and India.

Perhaps the new dot-com world needs a wake-up call, or a crowbar, to redirect it to serve mankind in nobler ways than it does now.

Newton Minow, former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, was right: We've taken the revolutionary advancement of television and created a vast wasteland, a video world devoted to our pleasures and appetites. Are we taking the Internet world and making an even bigger wasteland?

Let's get serious about how we use this new technology. If we raise standards, we can redesign cyberspace with content that provides more services to those in need.

How can we bridge the technology breach between the haves and the have-nots and create an Internet to help countries like Bangladesh?

We could start with incentives to entrepreneurs to develop educational software. There is a rush to wire every American school so students can have Internet access, but precious little is being done to provide software for educational programs.

There's much more profit in other activities like on-line retailing. In fact, on-line pornography outfits have more sophisticated software than even university-level educational programs.

Why not start a private foundation, with e-commerce philanthropists' providing incentives to Bangladeshi software developers to fund educational software?

The private sector and the U.S. government could establish a sort of national technology corps to develop Internet technology for nations like Bangladesh. This public-private partnership would motivate entrepreneurs to help Bangladesh and other struggling countries become part of the Internet business world.

Members of this "tech corps" could serve a year or two in another country, developing an infrastructure for Internet commerce that would promote greater capabilities for tech-based business.

These young adults would provide these countries with the bare essentials of technology, much as Peace Corps volunteers did with agricultural in the 1960s.

But these programs won't be rehashes of the "pie in the sky" giveaway programs of the 1960s.

With the enormous wealth being created in the dot-com world and the federal surplus (created in part by e-commerce profits), there is enough in the federal budget for such international outreach.

But it requires leaders in the private and federal sectors who understand the growing worldwide economic gap as well as visionaries to see what can be done to close it.

Why not make this an issue in the upcoming presidential election? Certainly this would be much more substantial than asking candidates if they know the names of foreign leaders.

Making a difference worldwide will take a willingness by Americans to share part of their great prosperity (again, generated by the New Economy and e-commerce).

If Americans do not make international economic development a major issue, the gap with countries like Bangladesh will surely widen to the point where revolution, war and famine are sure to erupt.

Such scourges have already ended up at our doorstep in Somalia, Haiti and Rwanda, and more will certainly follow.

It is in our enlightened self-interest to share our technological know-how and wealth. The thousands of Bangladeshi kids sleeping on curb sides at night deserve a sliver of our good fortune.



# Raising Standards on the Web
January 1, 2000
Source: http://www.planeta.com/ecotravel/weaving/johnshores.html

John Shores is the kind of practical guru who has used both cyberspace and grassroots forums to discuss and question and develop practical forms of ecotourism, environmental conservation and community work.

The Challenge of Ecotourism written by John Shores was one of the first features in the print version of Planeta, the journal that preceded the Planeta.com website. John now has his own Ecotourism Home Page. Having corresponded with John for a number of years, it was with great pleasure that I was able to meet him in the fall of 1999 in West Virginia. and at a conference at Stanford University in 2002. Here is the transcript of our online December 2000 conversation about the Web, ecotourism, the Peace Corps and other topics.

## What kind of work have you done in Latin America?

My love affair with Latin America began in 1972. With a Bachelor's degree in park planning in my hand, I joined the Peace Corps in response to a small poster on a bulletin board at the University of Michigan that said Peace Corps/Colombia needed park planners. For the next six years, I worked in first Colombia and second the Dominican Republic as an interpreter, park manager, trainer, and system planner. Both countries were initiating projects to expand their national park systems. My job was to help recruit and train staff, and advise the directors on adding new properties to the park estate. It was a fantastic opportunity.

In 1978 I returned to the US and went back to school. By this time Dr. Kenton Miller, considered by many to be the father of national parks in Latin America, was teaching at Michigan, so I returned to my alma mater and worked with him. After graduation, with a Master’s degree in "Resource Policy, Economics, and Management" this time, I returned to Washington DC and worked for RARE, WWF, TNC, and as an independent consultant.

In 1989 I joined Peace Corps again as a natural resources specialist, but this time I was on the staff at headquarters in Washington. The job was much broader than anything I had hoped for. My boss agreed that I would not be used as just a Latin America specialist, so in the first 12 months of the new job, I made 18 country visits all over the world. Peace Corps was starting new programs in Central and Eastern Europe, and they wanted to have an environmental component. The Pacific Island programs were starting to warm to the idea of environmental education, so we ran a few workshops for teachers, education heads, and volunteers. And I even made a few programming and evaluation trips to Latin America and the Caribbean. Fortunately I didn't have to maintain that pace for too long. It was an exciting but an exhausting pace.

My academic training and my primary interest is still parks and biodiversity. Latin America gave me the opportunity to cut my teeth on park planning and system design. Peace Corps provided that grounding in community process and participation. Work with RARE, WWF, and TNC gave me a nice look at the NGO side of the coin. And most of my independent consulting work has been for the bi-lateral and multi-lateral development agencies (USAID, IDB, World Bank, etc.), which gave me some experience with official development assistance.

I see my experience as gradually filling a toolbox with useful tools. To the academic tools for parks and biodiversity, I added community development, NGO development, participation, gender, finance, environmental education, computers, the internet, and maybe a few other tools.

## How did you begin to use the Web?

I have always been fascinated with tools and machinery. As a small child, I wanted to know how everything worked. So I took things apart... and usually got them back together, too. When personal computers hit the scene in the early 1980s, I was at Michigan and managed to get involved with the initiative to bring personal computers into the School of Natural Resources.

At some moment, everyone has probably complained about training manuals, but I happen to enjoy reading them. I want to know everything a computer can do, what all the applications can do, and how to use them. So reading training manuals was a no-brainer. With the manuals under my belt, I was beginning to help people purchase computers, install new hardware, and learn to use the software.

We actually had email before the Net. Many research universities were tied together by services such as the Merit Network. But you had to have an account at one of the participating universities.

Web use really blossomed in the early 1990s. The Peace Corps is just a tiny government agency, so it wasn't one of the early innovators. I set up my own private account on a local non-profit ISP in Washington DC, but was using it mostly to communicate with staff and consultants around the world who had their own private accounts. We kept agitating for email for all staff, but it took several years before Peace Corps was able to do this. In the meantime, I got more of my colleagues in the office on line through private accounts, and we built quite a network of the specialists in DC linked with volunteers in the field. Volunteers were setting up their own accounts, mostly with free services like Yahoo and Hotmail. Often I would know about something that had happened overseas before the higher-up staff in the country or in the United States knew about it, because a volunteer somewhere would email me.

Email totally changed the way we communicated. I could now have a sequential conversation with a number of colleagues scattered all over the world. We could plan trips, design workshops, develop training materials, and draft and revise documents -- all without ever seeing each other or incurring long-distance phone charges. So we increased the level and cycles of consultation and participation because the transaction cost was zero. More people, more iterations, more interchange. This added a richness to the process and to the products that we simply could not have achieved otherwise.

## How did the Peace Corps use -- or not use -- computers and Internet technology?

Peace Corps was using a minicomputer/terminal system for word processing of reports in Washington DC when I came back from overseas in 1978. There might be four terminals on a floor, and people had to sign up for a time-slot to use the machines. At least it was better than typing and retyping with a typewriter. There were a few Compaq portables around. This was the model where the keyboard snapped in place to cover the 6-inch screen. Luggable, but hardly portable. Since the office where I did some consulting work needed transportable computers, they ordered a few IBM-compatible desktops and a few heavy laptops. Then Peace Corps chose Macintosh as their standard computer. That must have been in the mid-1980s. My office continued to use legacy Leading Edge Model D desktops for a few more years after I joined them in 1989, but eventually we got Macs too.

Recognizing that most volunteers come straight out of college, and that most college students have Internet access, Peace Corps started its external web page -- http://www.peacecorps.gov -- primarily as a recruiting tool. I was chomping at the bit to get an intranet site set up to supply information to staff and volunteers in the field and promote broader exchanges, but the agency was very reluctant to put up an intranet. In fact, only recently did it finally come on line, after many years and several earlier attempts and frantic late-night shutdowns. The largest stumbling blocks seemed to be the office of communications and the office of general counsel. Finally their fears were assuaged and the intranet is up and running. At least that's what I'm told. Earlier in 2000 it was still limited to people inside the building in DC. I hope that by now it has become a global intranet for staff and volunteers wherever they may be. In the medium-term I could see it being open to all sustainable development practitioners. But that's many more years away.

The World Wise School program, which links schools in the US with volunteers serving overseas, has used web, video, CD, ICQ, and different live-video-over-Internet systems to increase the exchanges between volunteer in one country and a teacher and classroom somewhere in the US.

One area where we never succeeded very much was the idea of email discussion lists for topics such as agroforestry, environmental education, ecotourism, parks and biodiversity, sustainable agriculture, youth and environment, and any other topic in which volunteers are working. I envisioned this as a way for volunteers in different countries to exchange ideas and experiences, and for staff to monitor and advise as needed. These would be different from the public global lists on these topics, because many of the challenges of projects in Peace Corps are unique to Peace Corps.

For example, a volunteer is only on the site for two years. So we'd need to link them in, warm them up, and support them in internet time -- and that might be different from the normal pace of life in a rural community.

Volunteers usually do not have internet access in the towns where they work. They have to travel to a regional city, or wait until they get to the capital before they read their email. That creates a delay in their correspondence, but it's still usually a smaller delay than international snail mail to these towns.

Some volunteers with better computer skills have been asked by the agencies where they work to help set up web pages or email. And many of the volunteers are asked to teach English and computer skills, especially word processing. These are seen as basic skills that will be needed for the economies developing in these countries.

## Is there a difference in reaction to people reading your essays, say The Challenge of Ecotourism online as opposed to in print?

I have received hundreds of email requests for the full text of the ecotourism paper via email and only a handful of requests via the snail-mail route. So electronic distribution made a world of difference in distributing the paper. It has been published now in a handful of print-format journals and newsletters, and that has prompted a few more email messages from readers. I don't think anyone has ever written a snail-mail letter in response to the paper (although usually only the email address is given), so the mere fact of electronic publication may have automatically moved correspondence into the electronic forum.

Planeta was instrumental in publishing that article and giving it coverage. I submitted it for discussion at the workshop on ecotourism that we held as part of the IVth World Parks Congress in Caracas in 1992, but it became clear that the coordinator was going to write and publish his own work, rather than compile or even summarize the deliberations and submissions from the workshops. So I announced the paper on a few travel lists and then you kindly summarized it on Planeta. That really launched it to the wider audience, worldwide.

## Do you have any suggestions of how people can make better use of the internet in terms of promoting ecotourism and conservation in Latin America?

I would think that there is still plenty of potential for sustainable development activities on the internet. The important element is to get on the internet. It doesn't have to be expensive or require a vanity domain name. Just get a presence started.



# Plugged-In Planet: The Peace Corps' digital reinvention
October 1, 2001
By Lisa Hickey
Source: https://www.globalcrafts.org/news*3.html

A decade ago, a typical Peace Corps experience might consist of building outdoor toilets in rural villages lacking public sanitation. Toilets might be made of basic hand-mixed concrete poured over a banana-leaf-lined pit, and plumbing, a bucket of water poured into the bowl.

That was before last year, when former Peace Corps director Mark Schneider unveiled the Peace Corps' Global Technology Initiative. Now, a staff of about 70 volunteers, schooled by an IT trainer, is dedicated specifically to helping launch technology projects in developing nations. Meanwhile, Peace Corps volunteers are now expected to use computers (as well as banana leaves) in their fight against poverty.

For this newly created "e-Peace Corps," the timing couldn't have been better. With the tech sector shedding jobs, the organization is poised to receive even more Internet-attuned volunteers than ever.

"Historically, whenever there is a down-turn in the economy, more people enter the Peace Corps. And applicants these days definitely tend to be more 'tech savvy,'" says Gini Wilderson, who as the Peace Corps' information and communications technologies specialist is responsible for overseeing this sweeping transformation. "They are coming in with Web development, computer-training skills, and distance-education skills."

Connecticut native Andrew Cunningham, one of these Alley-era recruits, was doing tech support for Macintosh when he left after three years to join the Peace Corps. As a "natural resources" volunteer in the village of Concepcion de Maria in Nicaragua, near the Honduras border, Cunningham supervised the planting and growing of trees. But in time, he realized his computer skills could be his most significant legacy.

Backed by the community's leaders, Cunningham built a website so that international institutions could learn more about development projects occurring in the area; it allowed a local cooperative to drum up enough funds to purchase an ambulance to transport sick residents. Cunningham has also been training high school students in Word and PowerPoint, and helping them learn basic e-mail skills.

"One story that will always stick in my mind is the first computer class of a seventh-grade girl," he says. "She was from a nearby village that does not have electricity. It was obviously her first time to even see a computer. The little girl picked up the mouse and began to touch the monitor with it. The beautiful thing is that less than 30 minutes later, she was double-clicking, opening menus, and drawing pictures."

Kenya-based volunteer and former computer programmer Renice Jones agrees. "It's definitely not your father's Peace Corps anymore," Jones says. After working for Electronic Data Systems for 17 years, Jones decided it was time to escape corporate America. After arriving in Kenya, she encountered a women's group called Teenage Mothers Association of Kenya (TEMAK), whose primary function is to teach teenage mothers job skills and to provide primary education to their kids. To help the group raise extra money, Jones launched the website [www.globalcrafts.co.uk](http://www.globalcrafts.co.uk) to sell and distribute local crafts over the Internet, including TEMAK-manufactured items.

Corporate America has stood up and taken notice. Earlier this year, Hewlett-Packard and AOL Times Warner jointly awarded Jones something called a "Peace Pack," which is an up to $10,000 grant earmarked specifically for computers, printers, modems, digital cameras, and Internet services. The aid has also helped Jones' Kenyan village to purchase the domain name [www.womenofafrica.com](http://www.womenofafrica.com), so as to host other websites for African women and youth groups.

The Honduran town of Yuscaran is seeing some benefits of the tech initiative as well. There, Susan Stolpe and other volunteers received a Peace Pack earlier this year to help build a public library. With a population of 13,500 residents, most of whom don't have computer experience, Yuscaran is struggling to find sustainable economic opportunities. Local leaders believe that wiring the new library could also help promote the area outside of Nicaragua as a tourist destination, touting its colonial architecture, gold and silver mines, rainforests, and park-protected mountain ranges.

Critics say that these acts of corporate charity are often thinly veiled attempts to grab first-mover advantage in emerging markets. And, in many of these underserved towns, there may be more fundamental infrastructure issues to address. "We're still having problems sharing the analog dial-up telephone lines with multiple other computers," Jones says.

Further, language barriers can complicate the ramping up of IT skills, even for those in areas with existing high-end jobs. Volunteer Blair DeWeese, based in El Paraiso, Honduras, teaches computer skills to accountants who maintain vo9lumes of handwritten records. "Much of this could be automated by using Excel, but the workers don't know how to use it," DeWeese says, since all of the software manuals are still written in English.

Still, despite the hurdles, applicants keep coming. Douglas Miller, a Peace Corps recruiter in New York City, says the selection process is similar to Silicon Alley's in its heyday. "You don't necessarily have to have a degree in computer science [to do the work], but you do need to have some applicable work experience," he says.

And Miller has a knowledgeable perspective on the changes that have taken place in this 40-plus-year-old institution, having been a Peace Corps volunteer in Thailand himself 10 years ago. "None of this would have been relevant then," he explains. "There weren't even computers in the town."



# Every City is a Village - Recommendations for the Digital Freedom Initiative
April 6, 2003
By Trevor Harmon
Source: http://vocaro.com/trevor/dfi/

Since 1961, the Peace Corps has been sending volunteers to Ghana, West Africa, to work in education, business development, and environmental protection projects. Most of these volunteers work in remote areas where poverty is extreme and the small rural communities have the greatest need for teachers, engineers, and other skilled professionals. I was surprised, then, when I learned that the Peace Corps had placed a volunteer in Accra, the largest and wealthiest city in Ghana, to teach computer literacy at an upscale high school. I asked a Ghanaian friend why Accra should get computer experts when the villages up north must surely have the greater need for computer skills and information technology.

"When you're talking about computers in Africa," he said, "every city is a village."

This simple statement explains the motivation behind the Digital Freedom Initiative (DFI), an ambitious new project sponsored by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Beginning with a three-year, $6.5 million pilot program in Senegal, its long-term goal is to bring the benefits of computer technology and Internet access to developing countries. Several government agencies are participating, including the Peace Corps, USAID, and the USA Freedom Corps. Private companies are also welcome to join the project. Hewlett-Packard and Cisco, two of the largest computer technology companies in the world, have already signed on.

As a pilot project, DFI is still quite new, and the details of its implementation have not been made public. Several documents are available on the DFI website (1), but because the project is in its early stages, these documents are short on specifics. Instead, they offer plenty of nebulous phrases such as "enable innovation", "leverage leadership", and "enhance business competitiveness". Likewise, the press releases from Hewlett-Packard and Cisco claim that they will "co-invent locally relevant IT solutions" and "fuel technical education". Exactly how these organizations will accomplish such monumental tasks is unclear.

The dot-com boom and bust proved that computers and Internet access are not goals in themselves; they are merely tools. The directors of DFI should be careful not to fall into the trap of providing web browsers and disk drives to developing countries and simply hoping that economic prosperity will follow. Still, if every city in the developing world is a technological village, then even a little bit of progress can have a big impact. With the right planning, DFI can provide a foundation for growth in countries like Senegal and Ghana while helping to satisfy the global need for computer technology.

In the paragraphs that follow, I'll explain the current state of computer technology in West Africa and how it could change as a result of DFI. I'll also dissect the DFI's stated goals and speculate on their potential for success. Finally, I'll highlight a few possible shortcomings and offer some recommendations for future projects.

## Computer Access in West Africa

Today, access to computers in West Africa is at about the same level that it was in the United States during the mid-1980s. Large banks in the region use computers for processing transactions, government agencies track documents and records with computer databases, and many high schools have at least one computer on campus for administrative tasks or the science lab (see Figure 1). In the home, however, computers are still a luxury available only to the wealthy. The concept of a "personal" or "family" computer does not exist, or at least is a very new phenomenon, just as it was in 1984 when the first Apple Macintosh went on sale in the U.S.

The perception of computers by the general public is also similar to that of the American public fifteen years ago. Many West Africans understand the need for computer technology in business, science, and education, but most aren't sure how computers can help them in their daily lives. Clearly, this perception comes from simple economics. When a computer can cost as much as the average annual salary in West Africa, the benefits of owning one are hard to justify.

But if there are indeed true benefits in bringing computer technology to the region, then the solution is not just a matter of overcoming poverty. As the creators of DFI have recognized, developing countries lack the skilled workers that are needed to grow and sustain a computer industry. The schools, too, lag far behind the developed world in teaching basic computer literacy. Knowledge of computers is rare among young people in West Africa, and many schoolchildren have never even seen a computer.

Despite this shortage of computer know-how, or perhaps because of it, I discovered a genuine hunger for computers in both children and adults during my two-year stay in West Africa. The Peace Corps had placed me in a high school in a small rural town of Ghana, and I occasionally found time to teach basic computer classes for my students in the evening. By chance, I was able to assemble an ad-hoc computer lab using the six computers provided to the school by Ghana's Ministry of Education. (None of the local faculty knew how to operate the computers, so they were just collecting dust when I found them.)

The very first lesson remains clear in my mind: I gave no lecture; I simply allowed the students to play Solitaire on the computers. The idea was to give the students some practice with the mouse and reduce any apprehension they might have about technology-some were afraid to touch the computer for fear of breaking such an expensive machine. I also wanted to prove to them that a computer can be a tool for recreation, not just for business or learning.

To my surprise, the students needed little encouragement. Some of them brought cameras and posed for each other in front of the computers, smiling, hands hovering over the keyboard to give the impression that they knew how to type. Later, when I showed them how the computer can record and playback sounds, several of the girls began singing their favorite gospel tunes into the microphone, turning the class into an impromptu recording studio (see Figure 2). The computer classes became so popular that I later got requests from faculty members for private lessons.

If this experience is any guide, the Digital Freedom Initiative should have no trouble convincing the public of the benefits of computer technology. It shows that the scarcity of computers in Ghana, as well as Senegal and other developing countries, is clearly not a lack of motivation but a problem of economics and education. Computers are simply too expensive for these countries, and not enough people know how to harness the technology even when it is available.

## Time to catch up

Naturally, developed countries are not immune to these very same issues. In the United States, for example, there is concern over the "digital divide" between the suburbs and the inner-city. This gap, however, is much narrower than it was a decade ago.(2) Today, a basic home computer is affordable even for low-income American families--Wal-Mart sells them for $300--and virtually every high school in the country now has a computer lab of some kind. A more fundamental change is that computers have become nearly universal in American life, so there is a general appreciation of the benefits of computer technology and, perhaps more importantly, its limitations. This emergence of computers in business, education, and the home has occurred largely over the last fifteen years or so, which leaves developing countries about fifteen years behind.

Fortunately, such countries do not need fifteen years to catch up. They can leapfrog obsolete inventions and dead-end ideas, focusing only on technology that is known to work and is still relevant today. For instance, a Ghanaian acquaintance once told me that he was teaching himself MS-DOS, the Microsoft Disk Operating System, an unfriendly command-line environment. He said that people in developed countries had studied this system first before moving to its successor, Microsoft Windows, and he had therefore decided to study MS-DOS, as well. He didn't realize that it had since become extinct and is useful today only in a few arcane situations.

In a similar vein, dial-up Internet access over telephone lines is fast becoming out-of-date. Huge investments in upgrading to faster modems and increasing the number of dial-up access points are now going to waste. These days, the new standard is broadband Internet access through cable modem, satellite, or Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), and many homes and businesses are ditching their old analog modems. West Africa, on the other hand, has relatively little investment in dial-up networks, so it faces the unique opportunity of skipping the entire upgrade cycle and jumping directly to a broadband infrastructure.

So, in a certain sense, this lack of computer technology and infrastructure in West Africa could actually make development projects such as DFI a little bit easier to implement. The entire region is fertile ground for well-planned projects that avoid the mistakes and missteps of the past. With keen hindsight, plus a little help from developed countries, West Africa could slingshot itself into the digital age.

## Communication centers are the key

If West Africa is years behind in computer technology, then the obvious goal of any development initiative is to close the gap. The DFI could be the kind of project that helps reach this goal. According to information in press releases and other public documents, it offers several new and fundamentally different strategies that set it apart from previous attempts at bridging the digital divide. One DFI objective in particular looks very promising: "Leverage existing information and communications infrastructure to promote economic growth."(3)

This idea, vague though it may be, makes a lot of sense. Past initiatives (4) have attempted to copy ideas and business models from North America and Europe and apply them to West Africa, but these models are not always viable given the unique situation of developing countries. For example, the mantra of a certain U.S. software company is: "A computer on every desk and in every home".(5) Although this business model has worked well in the affluent United States, where many families earn enough income to purchase a home computer, trying to provide a computer for the majority of families in a developing country would almost certainly be a non-sustainable effort.

Instead, the DFI should look to an existing model that has already been proven to work for another kind of expensive technology: the telephone. A residential telephone line is a luxury item in West Africa, and as a result, the so-called "communication center" has flourished even in the smallest of towns. These centers are nothing more than small shops that include at least one telephone (usually a fax machine, as well) and offer pay-per-minute telephone service to many who could not otherwise afford it. More than just payphones, these centers are private businesses that generate profit for their owners while sharing among the whole community the high cost of telecommunication.

With so many of these businesses already in place, the DFI could "leverage existing infrastructure" by promoting the use of computers at communication centers. Indeed, some centers located in the cities have already installed a computer or two, but the smaller centers, especially those in more rural areas, are still struggling to upgrade their services with computer technology. DFI could play a role here by providing computer training, installation support, and perhaps some type of financing to help local entrepreneurs overcome the steep cost of computer hardware. It could also promote open-source software (6), such as Linux (7) and OpenOffice (8), as a cheaper alternative to commercial software packages costing hundreds of dollars each (9).

The demand for these shared computers should grow as more people in the region become computer literate and discover the value of information technology. For example, a Peace Corps volunteer working in central Ghana discovered that funerals, a cornerstone of West African life, can be an unlikely source of income for entrepreneurs armed with a computer and a printer. She helped start a small but profitable business in her community that produced full-color funeral invitations for the recently bereaved. Similar business opportunities (but hopefully not quite so morbid) should appear in West Africa's computer industry over time and help accelerate the growth of its economy.

## Internet for the masses

Computers, printers, and a few solid business plans will surely help this economy, but they will not be enough to make it competitive in the global marketplace. If West Africa is to reach that kind of goal, it will also require better access to the Internet. Luckily, the Internet seems to be exploding all over the region. Senegal, for instance, became the proud new recipient last year of a fiber-optic Internet backbone. This undersea cable, which joins Senegal to fifteen other countries in Africa, Europe, and Asia, provides enough high-speed Internet service for the entire population (10).

The DFI has appeared at the perfect time for Senegal to take advantage of this new Internet backbone. DFI volunteers could apply their networking skills in helping local Internet service providers extend the backbone throughout the interior of Senegal. Laying fiber-optic lines to every town and city would be too expensive, of course, so a hybrid approach would be the best alternative. For example, the government could provide the funding for high-capacity data lines running only between the largest cities, and private businesses could then step in to provide cheaper, slower connections linking sites within those cities to central access points.

A possible medium for these intra-city links is Wireless Fidelity, or Wi-Fi. Wi-Fi is an umbrella term that refers to any type of wireless networking equipment operating in the 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz radio frequencies.(11) Because these frequencies don't require licenses, the equipment is very inexpensive, and as a result, the popularity of Wi-Fi has risen while prices continue to drop. Today, wireless Internet access can be delivered to remote sites up to twenty miles away for about $200, making Wi-Fi an excellent match for West Africa. (12) Senegal could, with help from the DFI, build inexpensive Wi-Fi networks that mesh together dozens of communication centers throughout a city. Sharing a single high-capacity access point in this manner would boost Internet connections to broadband speeds while avoiding the high cost of dial-up.

## No technology without deregulation

A convenient side-effect of fast, always-on Internet access is the possibility of VoIP, or "Voice over the Internet Protocol". Simply put, it allows telephone conversations to take place over the Internet rather than over traditional copper lines. Although the sound quality of VoIP is worse than standard telephone service, it costs far less. Net2Phone (13), for instance, provides Internet software that allows computer users in Senegal to call anyone in the United States for just ten cents per minute. If both parties have a computer, then calls can be made completely free using software such as PC-Telephone (14). VoIP service is already popular in some Internet cafés in West Africa.

The shift from standard phone service to VoIP has hit a few regulatory speed bumps. Many West African countries, in an attempt to protect their government-owned telephone monopolies, have imposed strict controls over any company offering voice communication, in effect making VoIP illegal. In Ghana, an Internet service provider was jailed for providing VoIP service (15).

These draconian policies have made the second goal of DFI, to "promote pro-growth regulatory structures", my favorite. It is a reminder that technology alone cannot solve the problems faced by developing countries. For the DFI to work, it will also need to begin tearing down long-standing ivory towers in the governments of those countries: high import tariffs, large bureaucracies, and a resistance to privatization of public industries. Such hurdles can prevent technology from entering West Africa and allowing it to thrive. Imported computer equipment, for example, even when donated to a non-profit organization, can be held up in customs for months while waiting for the proper documents to work their way through the system. (16) By helping to eliminate obstacles like these, the DFI will make its work, as well as all future initiatives, easier and more effective.

## Not the final answer

The Digital Freedom Initiative is a noble step in the right direction. It should help bring about an evolutionary change in the way developing countries use computer technology, but it still lacks a few vital components.

Most notably, it offers no plans for education. Computer literacy among the public is absolutely necessary if the initiative is to remain sustainable and have an effect over the long term. Until the level of computer literacy in a developing country reaches critical mass, any large-scale benefits promised by DFI may not appear. This does not mean that the initiative needs to produce computer scientists and electrical engineers, but it should at least strive to increase basic knowledge of computers, especially among younger people. (17) In this new generation is where the real technology revolution is taking place in West Africa, and it is where the DFI should focus its efforts.

For example, a development agency called ActionAid, known for its strong presence in West Africa, sponsors after-school clubs to promote AIDS education and prevention. The idea is to help students grow more comfortable with complicated subjects, expose them to basic facts, and simply make learning a little more fun. In the same manner, the DFI could sponsor high school computer clubs, set up computer labs on campus, and train faculty in computer literacy so that local teachers can run the labs, thus making the project sustainable. (18) Unfortunately, the DFI appears to have neglected the importance of general computer literacy in the communities where it will operate.

Another strangely absent component of the DFI is funding for computer hardware. The initiative's goal is to bring computer skills to developing countries, but such skills may have little value with so few computers available to those countries (see Figure 3). While the initiative should be applauded for not donating computers blindly and without regard to providing skills (19), it seems to have gone to the opposite extreme by providing training alone and overlooking the difficulty of purchasing a computer in a developing country.

The DFI need not become a charity in order to solve this problem. Instead, it would only need to offer some financial aid to those who want to purchase a computer. For instance, a partnership between DFI and local banks could provide low-interest loans to families who want to buy a home computer. Another possibility is a fund-matching program with the national governments of West Africa: For every two computers that a government buys for a public library or school, the DFI would provide funds for the purchase of a third computer. Programs like these would avoid the climate of dependency that comes from charity while still offering financial help and an incentive for individuals and governments to purchase computers on their own.

But perhaps the most essential part of the DFI has nothing to do with development work. It is a pilot project, after all, so its degree of success will decide whether it will expand to countries beyond Senegal. It will also guide the path of future technology development projects funded by other agencies and countries. A reliable and objective measure of its success is therefore mandatory. The DFI says it will judge its success by "performance benchmarks that measure small business growth, market efficiency gains, business integration with international partners and markets, and job growth." (20)

These criteria are rather hazy and are not directly related to the level of access to computer technology in a developing country. In fact, such benchmarks will likely improve independently of the DFI. They are purely economic indicators, and the economies of Senegal and other developing countries should continue to grow even without the support of the DFI. True performance benchmarks would include statistics such as the number of computers purchased from year to year, number of Internet access accounts in service, and the ability of graduating high school students to perform well on tests of computer literacy.

Despite these shortcomings, the DFI looks to be a superb project overall. It recognizes the importance of matching initiatives to the specific needs of developing countries, rather than trying to shoehorn a particular project into them just because it worked in the industrialized world. It also attempts to work at the grassroots level through individual businesses, rather than through a government bureaucracy, which should make its work more effective and longer lasting. Even if the DFI pilot project is judged a failure, it will at least have drawn more attention to the computer technology gap in developing countries.

## About the Author

Trevor Harmon served in the Peace Corps from 1999 to 2001 as a math and physics teacher in Ghana, West Africa. He is currently working on a Ph.D. in computer engineering at the University of California, Irvine. He can be reached at trevor@vocaro.com].

## Footnotes

1\. See: <http://www.dfi.gov>

2\. A study conducted by Grunwald Associates claims that Internet use among minority and low-income children in the U.S. is rapidly increasing, as reported by Reuters. See: "'Digital divide' shrinks among U.S. kids".

3\. The unabridged statement is "Leveraging existing technology and communications infrastructure in new ways to help entrepreneurs and small businesses better compete in both the regional and global market place."

4\. In the Philippines, an aid-funded project to introduce a health information system was designed according to a Western model that assumed the presence of skilled programmers, skilled project managers, a sound technological infrastructure, and a need for information outputs like those used in an American health care organization. In reality, none of these was present in the Philippine context and the information system failed.

5\. Bill Gates, Microsoft Corporation: "We started with a vision of a computer on every desk and in every home...Every day, we're finding new ways for technology to enhance and enrich people's lives. We're really just getting started."

6\. Open-source software is designed and built through public collaboration. Anyone can modify, distribute, and use open-source software free of charge, making it ideal for developing countries. See: <http://www.opensource.org>

7\. Linux is a Unix-like operating system created by Linus Torvalds with the assistance of developers around the world. Developed under an open-source license, Linux is freely available to everyone. See: <http://www.linux.org>

8\. OpenOffice is a suite of productivity software including a word processor, spreadsheet, presentation manager, and drawing program. Though very similar to the Microsoft Office software package, it is open-source and can be used free of charge. See: <http://www.openoffice.org>

9\. Based on a sample of current retail prices, the Microsoft Windows operating system and Microsoft Office productivity suite cost around $625 per user. The Linux operating system and OpenOffice suite, though not quite as polished or user friendly as their Microsoft counterparts, are completely free.

10\. Initially, the bandwidth of the cable is twenty gigabytes per second, nearly thirty times the total previous bandwidth for all of Africa. Plans are in the works to upgrade capacity to 120 gigabytes per second, the equivalent of 5.8 million simultaneous telephone calls. See: <http://www.worldmarketsanalysis.com>

11\. Wireless networking equipment based on the Wi-Fi standard is also known as 802.11a (5 GHz), 802.11b (2.4 GHz), or 802.11g (2.4 GHz). See: <http://www.80211-planet.com>

12\. With the addition of high-gain directional antennas, two Wi-Fi networking cards or access points can communicate at distances of up to 30 kilometers with minimal signal loss. See: <http://www.oreillynet.com>

13\. Net2Phone, Inc. offers PC-to-phone telephony software and calling cards that use VoIP networks. See: <http://www.net2phone.com>

14\. PC-Telephone sells software that can make unlimited PC-to-PC calls without any additional charges. See: <http://www.pc-telephone.com>

15\. According to Balancing Act, an African development advocacy group, a Ghanaian named Francis Quartey was jailed for allegedly providing VoIP services through his ISP. See: <http://www.balancingact-africa.com/>

16\. This happened to a friend of mine in the Peace Corps. She had managed to get her relatives and friends to donate four computers and have them shipped to the school where she was teaching. When the computers arrived in Ghana, they wallowed in customs for two months while the government sorted through the paperwork proving that the computers were actually donations and not for sale. The students weren't able to use the computers until the following semester.

17\. While teaching an after-school computer class in Ghana, I discovered some cultural differences that make learning how to use a computer a bit more difficult for young people in West Africa. For example, my students often brought a "white board" to my regular classes during the day. These boards are thin, paper-sized pieces of wood painted white and coated with a clear varnish. The students take notes on them in pencil, then erase them using a mixture of soap and water. It saves them money because they don't need to waste paper on scratch work and practice problems. But in the evenings, when I tried to teach them how to use a word processor, I learned that they carried this concept of a "white board" a bit too far. Instead of simply closing an unwanted document, they would carefully erase every word that they had typed by holding down the Backspace button. I had to explain carefully that a computer screen does not need erasing. For more reflections on this experience, see: <http://vocaro.com>

18\. Finding volunteers to teach computer literacy should not be difficult. The typical Peace Corps volunteer, for instance, is a computer expert by West African standards simply because she knows how to surf the web, send email, and tell the difference between a word processor and a spreadsheet. Passing on these basic skills is all that would be needed.

19\. Carly Fiorina, Hewlett-Packard chairman and chief executive officer, said in a press release: "The Digital Freedom Initiative makes it clear that financial capital alone is not the greatest wealth multinationals can bring to the developing world; it is human capital. It is experience and knowledge and the ability to use those skills to empower local communities. It is using technology not as an end in itself but as an enabler to address fundamental problems of hunger, disease and economic development." See: <http://www.hp.com>

20\. The unabridged statement is: "At regular intervals, DFI projects will be evaluated based on performance benchmarks that measure small business growth, market efficiency gains, business integration with international partners and markets, and job growth." See: <http://www.dfi.gov>




# Technologies of Peace
May 2, 2007
Source: http://hir.harvard.edu/the-technologies-of-peace/

Slavery was once called “the peculiar institution”, but a better candidate for this title may be the Peace Corps. Current geopolitics make this a good time to probe the Corps’ peculiarity, as prelude to a long overdue reconceptualization of what is arguably the most underused federal entity. An imaginatively reinvented Peace Corps could powerfully promote US interests in a period when perceptions of American motives are increasingly relevant to global realignment. It could also capitalize on an unprecedented opportunity to avail US soft power of a resource historically associated with initiatives of war rather than peace: high technology.

This article draws on three significant bodies of government experience: those of former US President Jimmy Carter; of a former Vice Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral (Ret.) William A. Owens; and of Ambassador JR Bullington, Director of the US Peace Corps in Niger since 2000. All three generously discussed their thoughts on the role and future of the Peace Corps with me and thanks are due to all three for their cooperation.

## “The Peace Corps is in the forefront of opportunity.”

In a personal interview filmed at the Carter Center in Atlanta in September I asked the former president how much could be reasonably expected from the Peace Corps by way of altering the world’s perception of the US, especially in Islamic areas. He told me America’s image “certainly can be affected in areas of the world that now look upon the US unfavorably.” Just two days before our interview, Carter said, he had returned from visits to Mali, Nigeria and Ethiopia (90%, 50% and 45%-50% Muslim respectively), and there were some regions of those countries “where the US had a very unfavorable image”. The Peace Corps had volunteers in all three countries, he said, “and I think they could be a good avenue towards putting forward the best possible image of America”. This image would associate the US with justice, peace, humility, service and compassion. “To me those are the characteristics that historically have made our nation a great one. But in recent years we have seen that that list of characteristics, at least among some people, has become very doubtful. I think that the Peace Corps can correct that misconception of the basic motivations of most citizens of my country.”

Carter noted that he may be the only person in the world whose mother and grandson had both served in the Corps: “The Peace Corps means an awful lot to me personally.” He is in favor of expanding the Corps because he and former First Lady Rosalynn Carter “go to some countries that are desperately in need, and the leaders of those countries appeal to me as a former president.” He would like to see “a greater allocation of funds for the Peace Corps” because in national security terms — “that is, reducing the animosity of poverty-stricken people around the world toward America” — the Corps is “in the forefront of that opportunity”.

Carter’s perspective on the Corps is arguably unique because of the extent to which the agency’s work complements that of the Atlanta-based Carter Center, a non-profit founded in 1982 by the former president and his wife. In partnership with Emory University the center promotes human rights and projects that combat poverty, disease and “unnecessary human suffering” around the world. One of the ways he would like to see the Corps expanded is via increased cooperation with the center. “We really would like to have fifty Peace Corps volunteers here to help us with programs. The Carter Center has active programs in sixty-five nations on earth. Thirty-five of them are in Africa. They are the poorest, most forgotten, destitute people in the world. And we work side by side with Peace Corps volunteers. Sometimes they are our direct representative in some of the most remote areas … and we depend on them to represent the Carter Center.”

Carter sees several ways to beef up the Corps, starting with a greater effort to recruit senior citizens. “I have, maybe, a biased point of view because my mother didn’t go into the Peace Corps until she was about 70 years old and it transformed her life. And there are many people who have retired from very successful careers who I think could be specifically recruited to the Peace Corps.” He’d also like to see the Corps given greater freedom to aid countries whose leaders don’t happen to be popular with the White House. It “troubles” him, he explains, that “sometimes there are nations whose leaders might be alienated from the White House or from Washington who are deprived of the services of the Peace Corps.” Carter would like to see a policy of greater inclusiveness whereby the Corps does not have to “judge a country by whether we like their leaders, who quite often are subject to change”, but “only on how much their people need Peace Corps services.”

On the subject of the position that the Peace Corps occupies in America’s top-of-the-mind awareness, I asked Carter whether it would be helpful to appoint a high-profile director. “Well, I think so,” he replied, qualifying this by pointing to the example of UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund), which has a long record of appointing movie stars and other celebrities as public spokespeople and ambassadors. “The Director may be a tough, hard-nosed, very competent, proven manager of large and complex organizations and big budgets,” Carter commented, “and quite often the recipient countries have no idea who the Director is, but, but we could adopt the policy of UNICEF to have a representative, for public relations, for raising funds, for raising awareness, someone who’s well-known, maybe a famous sports figure or famous actor or actress or famous musician. I think that’s something that could be done.” He added: “If that request was made to someone who is famous I think they would respond favorably.”

I asked Carter if he believed the Peace Corps could be improved by being made more technologically sophisticated. His reply: “I think the utilization of modern technology, particularly in the communication field, is something that ought to be introduced into the Peace Corps very aggressively. My grandson, who returned recently from the Peace Corps after two and a half years, took with him his computer and he had to ride about 20 miles before he could find a place that had electric power and a telephone circuit into which he could connect.” With modern generators, solar cells, small, very efficient computers and satellite networks, Carter said, “I don’t see why, within the bounds of reason, every single Peace Corps person … shouldn’t have instantaneous communication with the outside world. I think that would enhance not only their own spirit and self-respect and security, but it would also let them have a more effective way to deal with the people around them, if the Peace Corps volunteer, instead of being isolated for three or four weeks or months at a time, had a daily awareness of world events, and what could be happening that reflected the particular nation in which they serve, or the US.” He added: “I think that technology is available and with a minimum contribution to each Peace Corps volunteer those standardized mechanisms could be utilized.”

Carter’s comments, especially the idea of transforming the Peace Corps through technology, converge interestingly with Owens’ interpretation of the Revolution in Military Affairs: the former Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs advises intensive conversion of the military into an information technology apparatus integrated into the world’s most advanced telecommunications society, which he has urged the US rapidly to become. Without these changes, Owens has argued, the US cannot sustain competitive edge in national security, intelligence or economic performance in the next twenty years. He supports the re-envisioning of the Peace Corps in five linked areas: (1) reinventing America’s international profile via a new use of soft power; (2) moving from a war-defined, non-technological, reactive theory of peace to a proactive theory of peace as a normal component of technologically advanced democracy; (3) reappraising the Corps as a national strategic asset whose value remains largely untapped; (4) the Corps as a model for the technological reinvention of government agencies for the 21st century; and (5) redefining civil society as information technology society.

## Reinventing the US’s international profile

In re-evaluating the role of the Peace Corps along the lines explored in my discussion with President Carter, two facts must be confronted: (a) America’s global image is in crisis; and (b) receding US prestige involves cultural as much as military factors. A 2004 report of the Pew Global Attitudes Project (chair: former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright) found anti-Americanism “deeper and broader” than in any modern period, with negative perceptions widespread in European and Muslim nations. Publics in surveyed countries expressed considerable skepticism of US motives. Majorities in France, Germany, Pakistan, Jordan, Morocco and Turkey believed the war on terror reflected US desires to control Mideast oil and the world.

Two recent books bring these attitudes into focus. In Beyond the Age of Innocence: Rebuilding Trust Between America and the World, Kishore Mahbubani, Singapore’s former ambassador to the United Nations, sees ebbing US prestige as not merely due to Bush Administration policies but as a “tectonic shift” in world opinion. Even when US commerce and culture are embraced, Mahbubani notes, their perceived one-sidedness causes suspicion and resentment. America’s soft power is seen as extended hard power, an “increasingly frayed velvet glove that covers a mailed fist.” The US needs to invite participation in its culture instead of heavy-handedly imposing it.

In Weapons of Mass Distraction: Soft Power and American Empire, Canadian journalist Matthew Fraser describes how movies, television, pop music and the fast food industry make US culture ubiquitous. But while these industries are economically potent, they fail to transmit the most culturally valuable contents of US society. More overtly, they reveal America’s talent for shooting itself in the foot vis a vis global public relations. Hollywood blockbusters and fast food franchising machineries are genuine accomplishments, but it is unrealistic to expect them to represent high philosophical values. Foreigners seeking national values in these artifacts can be forgiven for perceiving the US as materialistic and shallow. With astonishing irony, the society preeminent in modern advertising has abysmally failed to market its greatest cultural goods.

The US’s core national values differ markedly from those which its detractors identify with it. Its positive values include reverence for human rights, liberty, opportunity conferred without prejudice, moral responsibility, the free play and optimal development of intelligence, individual dignity, the desire to learn from all traditions and incorporate their wisdom into the complex multicultural fabric that is America. The values, in short, of the Peace Corps since its inception in 1961. Yet in Niger, which is unlikely to be unique in this regard, many Europeans see the Corps as an intelligence organization. French and German volunteers do not associate with Peace Corps volunteers, even in the same small, remote town, according to the Peace Corps Country Director for Niger, Jim Bullington. At a 2004 reception the anti-Americanism of DED (a German volunteer organization) personnel was palpable, says Bullington, who has served as a former US ambassador, a career US State Department diplomat for 27 years, Director of the Center for Global Business at Old Dominion University and Senior Fellow at the US Armed Forces Staff College. “In decades of diplomatic work with Europeans in Asia and Africa, I had never felt such hostility,” he recalls. Clearly, US soft power, though immense, projects an inadequate message; this message handicaps even the Peace Corps, arguably the purest institutional expression of American idealism. To project its values more effectively may be impossible without re-conceptualizing and strengthening the Corps.

## Peace as war-defined and non-technological…or as a normal component of technologically advanced democracy?

According to novelist-essayist Gore Vidal, he suggested the idea of the Peace Corps to John F. Kennedy during the latter’s presidential candidacy. Whether or not any such communication triggered the Corps’ origin, Vidal’s account usefully indicates two sensibilities on which the agency was founded. This history, and the paradigms that underlie it, must be taken into account in any attempt to appraise or re-imagine the Corps. Kennedy embodied American imperial presence, Caesar as global benefactor. Vidal represented an ambivalent intelligentsia captivated by the political establishment’s mystique, yet suspicious of it, and deeply respectful of the idea that writers should serve a counterculture. The Peace Corps thus reflected a 1960s climate of conflict: geopolitically, the Cold War, and culturally, the anguished national divisions ranging from civil rights and race to Vietnam and sexual customs, awkwardly intruding social idealism into a government enmeshed in Vietnam. Congressman James A. Leach (R-Iowa) has observed: “President Nixon was clearly embarrassed by inheritance of this Kennedy/Shriver treasure and frankly apprehensive that America’s best youth would come home committed to a non-realpolitik internationalism that might not suit his party’s banner. But he didn’t have the political capital to bury the institution, so he chose to hide it, by reducing its size and institutionally downgrading its status and putting it under a newly created umbrella agency called ACTION.” (It was President Carter who declared the Corps a fully autonomous agency in a 1979 executive order.)

This conflictual origin underlying the Peace Corps’ peculiarity within government is not unique. It continues a tradition of pacifist enterprises defined by war. For centuries peace initiatives expressed deliberative aftermaths of war, climates of fear or moral concern preceding possible war, or dissent during war. Peace has been seen as the absence of violence or as the mitigation of legitimate or illegitimate force. So pervasive is this paradigm that we call police officers, who labor amid actual and / or potential violence, peace officers. Peace initiatives are encumbered with the political baggage and vocabulary of violence. This often conspicuously impedes stated objectives, as with the League of Nations. A feature of this custom of talking peace in the language of war has been the conceptualization of peace pursuits as non-technological. Military pursuits, it is assumed, demand budgets for sophisticated technologies; peace pursuits, if supported by well-equipped militaries, require only the non-technological arts of power brokers –the world of Machiavelli’s 16-century treatise The Prince.

“Many of the diplomatic techniques on which we rely are archaic,” Kennedy’s US Ambassador to India J.K.Galbraith wrote in his 1969 essay “The American Ambassador”. After 35 years this remains so, engendering budgets that favor soldiers over diplomats. The identification of peace pursuits with ancient, non-technological skills is reinforced by anti-technological philosophies associating advanced technology with war and such undesirable effects as environmental despoliation. This bias underpins the concept of the military-industrial complex and the undervaluation of links between peaceful socio-economic structures and technological development (see economic historian John U. Nef’s 1950 study “War and Human Progress”).

In a high-technology world, then, the Peace Corps operates anomalously in a climate in which peace is seen in terms of war and of a history of ideas associating advanced technology with war. However, far from advanced technology being a military preserve, Admiral Owens, the former Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, believes the US military is dangerously underserved in advanced technologies (which for practical purposes means information technologies). And not only the military but government generally. This view is given added credence by the fact that the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has arisen expressly because of intelligence-processing agency failures, due partly to internal politics but significantly to inadequate technology. Clearly, high technology is not just the business of war. It is very much the business of peace: of building information-processing structures for a peaceful, secure, efficient, competitive America able to maintain global leadership, effectively export a peace that is not only an absence of war but a positive global model of economic growth, and share information infrastructure and knowledge with other nations. In this context a re-budgeted Peace Corps with state-of-the-art technologies is a peace-exporting instrument of incalculably great advantage to US interests.

## A national strategic asset whose value remains largely untapped

In discussion for this article Owens told me: “Technology means the end of the era of the lonely Peace Corps worker cut off from his support base. A Peace Corps volunteer can now be set down in a desert or on a remote plain without any modern amenity, and have with him or her a compact computer or array of computers, powered by solar cells, making available to local residents a library of hundreds of volumes under Corps supervision. Via satellite, Corps officers and their beneficiaries can connect virtually.

constantly with Washington and a Corps telecommunity worldwide.” Unknowingly echoing President Carter’s words, he added: “The technology is available now.” For Peace Corps personnel used to missions in areas without electricity, let alone resources even distantly approaching those Owens describes, technological empowerment offers an extraordinarily exciting prospect, as is the Peace Corps expansion scenario that this implies. But does the political will exist to mobilize a Corps using the most sophisticated technology available to share America’s skills, values and knowledge with other nations via electronic access to US libraries, teachers and knowledge pools, and staffing consistent with international peace promotion? This question exposes how we define the pursuit of peace.

If we see the pursuit of peace as primarily a function of military and consular actions, it would not be inappropriate to see the Corps as at best a benign but essentially peripheral function whose federal purpose is analogous to that of a marginal public relations outpost of a large corporation. This role matches the Corps’ current resources: a fiscus of $319.5 million, 7700 volunteers. The hope is for 11 250 personnel by 2008 “at a rate consistent with funding levels and infrastructure support”, Peace Corps Director Gaddi H.Vasquez has stated. But President Bush’s 2001 inaugural support of Peace Corps growth has not translated into appropriations. A telling example is a 2004 Peace Corps request for USAID funds for use in poverty-stricken Niger. This request was to assign Corps volunteers to help fledgling democratically elected local governments in Niger to engage their unaccustomed economic and social development responsibilities.

The new mayors and council members have no experience at all in local government. Many are illiterate. They very much want Peace Corps help, reports Director Bullington. Such a project offers the US an opportunity to implement a conspicuous, innovative expression of American idealism and commitment to promote democracy, accomplishments which have special geopolitical importance in an Islamic country (which Niger is). But the request was declined. The annual amount that could not be found for it: about $200,000. It is thought-provoking to consider this alongside the 2005 profiles of the Department of Defense (2.3 million military personnel; almost 700,000 civilian personnel; discretionary budget authority of $401.7 billion) and State Department (30 266 personnel; discretionary budget authority of $10.3 billion).

In 1996, Peace Corps Director Loret Miller Ruppe reported: “This agency’s budget has less in purchasing power than when Sargent (Shriver) left it in the ’60s. In 1981 it was listed in the 150 Account under ‘miscellaneous’ … Its budget was less than the military marching band.” For an agency exporting peace, signaling the US’s highest values to the world, and disseminating US democracy, literacy, health practices and other desired national characteristics, these circumstances are egregious. Much consular, ambassadorial and attaché work is not proactive peace promotion in the same sense that Peace Corps work is. It is, indeed, unfair to expect conventional diplomats to provide the services that idealistically motivated Corps volunteers are uniquely positioned to supply. Budgets should reflect this fact, and the growing significance to US interests of the Corps’ mission.

Director Ruppe said in 1996: “The Peace Corps is needed now more than ever. It is our nation’s greatest peace-building machine.” She asked: “Is peace simply the absence of war? Or is it the absence of the conditions that bring on war, the conditions of hunger, disease, poverty, illiteracy and despair?” It would be unrealistic to expect the Corps to solve such problems. But it is surely among the most effective tools available to export the values, motivations and knowledge without which they cannot be solved. The power of example and passionately impelled personal instruction by idealistic young civilians can scarcely be equaled as a global communication medium for the US. These are the assets the Corps offers America in its urgent quest for foreign remediation. They are potent for any policy that is seriously predicated on President Bush’s second inaugural address. “There is only one force of history that can break the reign of hatred and resentment, and expose the pretensions of tyrants, and reward the hopes of the decent and tolerant, and that is the force of human freedom,” the President said, adding: “The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world.” This exporting-freedom doctrine continued President Reagan’s 1982 call, in Britain’s House of Commons, for “a crusade for freedom that will engage the faith and fortitude of the next generation”. But as Iraq shows, democratic culture is less exportable than consumer goods. Waging peace is unlike waging war. Pursuing peace through healthy societies is analogous to a hygiene policy focused primarily not on curing or preventing illness but on realizing wellness potential. Such a hygiene policy incidentally discourages illness. A similar foreign policy discourages violent conflict. But chiefly each aims to unlock energies of optimal development. President Bush’s second inaugural address ostensibly recognizes this. Bullington concurs: “As an American credo, it is as significant as President Kennedy’s 1961 call to ‘bear any burden’ and Martin Luther King’s ‘I have a dream’ speech”. Indeed, careful study of the president’s address shows that it articulates a new foreign policy paradigm. But paradigms must be applied to be translated into leadership that affects history. For this one to be felt, the Peace Corps must be expanded.

There are several routes by which such an expansion could be meaningfully initiated:

- A formal presidential policy statement recognizing the Corps as a key example and instrument of the second inaugural’s message, and as an under-used engine of peace promotion that should be reinvigorated and expanded.
- The appointment of a new and imaginatively selected Corps director to implement this vision, drawn from the ranks of individuals with sufficient public stature to signify a fresh beginning (someone with the profile of former Secretary of State Colin Powell or Governor Jeb Bush, whose son served as a Corps volunteer).
- Budget support necessary for growth at the rate of at least 1000 Volunteers per year over the next decade (this is probably the most the organization could currently digest without system overload).
- Diversion of USAID funds to the Corps, in the amount of, at the very least, $100 000 to $500 000 per year for each post (depending on volunteer numbers), to be used as a flexible and easily accessible source of funding for smaller Corps projects (something similar existed in the past but was terminated).
- Creative experiments with new approaches to Corps service, such as a one-year term designed to re-enlist Corps veterans from the 1960s and 1970s who are now facing retirement and have added a lifetime of experience to their youthful idealism.

To these modifications of existing Corps structures a new technological dimension should be added, not only to empower the agency in a fitting way for its 21st-century mission but to enable it to serve as a prototype for other federal agencies in need of similar technological transformation. Indeed, this may be among the most fertile benefits of an aggressive technological transformation of the Corps.

## The Peace Corps as a model for reinventing government agencies for the 21st century.

Critics may paint the Corps as a federal tributary too remote from mainstream national priorities to warrant greater funding. This characterization is strongly counterable. The Corps is at least as crucial as many other agencies. Geopolitical relations cannot progress effectively until other nations better appreciate US purposes, a desideratum the Corps can uniquely promote. Additionally, strong domestic reasons support the Corps’ development as a prototypical 21st-century government structure indicated by efficiency, global competitiveness and technological opportunity: the federal telecommunity. This benefit will surprise those who see the Corps as isolated from mundane federal machineries, as well as federal managers who remain aloof from the fact that unless agency telecommunications sophistication is revolutionized, the US risks major strategic vulnerabilities. These include information management failures of the kind that prompted the crisis establishment of DHS; government inability to mesh productively with private entities to develop national infrastructures competitive with other advanced nations; archaic federal human resource deployment; exposure to terrorist disruption.

Federal obliviousness to telework opportunities is serious. Under 3% of eligible DHS staff telework, reports Chuck Wilsker, president of the Telework Coalition, a Washington, DC-based research group. Figures published in February showed that almost two thirds of federal employees are not allowed to telecommute, despite Congressional penalties for agencies not allowing telework options. A CDW Government Inc. survey found 87% of employees would telecommute if permitted to. Government Reform Committee Chairman Tom Davis (R-VA), has told the House’s oversight hearing on federal telework: “The war on terror makes the ability to work at off-site locations more than an attractive option for employees and employers; it’s now an imperative.” In 1996 House Democratic Whip Rep. Steny Hoyer (MD) briefed then Vice President Gore on the research of technology trend analyst Jay John Hellman, who forecasts an era of technologically induced “virtual adjacency” government. Hoyer recommended Hellman’s “economically and environmentally efficient ways to reinvent government”.

Hellman believes traditional government structures are obsolete and that national interest requires switching to federal telecommunities: teams of dispersed workers linked around the clock by secure, state-of-the-art fiber optic telecommunications, including videoconferencing and information managed for maximum immunity to disruption. DHS is currently considering Hellman’s ideas for its National Capital Region headquarters. This confluence of strategic, commercial infrastructure and technological transitions recalls President Eisenhower’s 1956 initiation of the US interstate highway network (the “National Defense Highway System”) to facilitate commercial traffic, nuclear-attack evacuations and rapid military transport. William M. Mularie, a former national defense intelligence administrator now heading the Virginia-based Telework Consortium, a government-funded research entity, comments: “In tele-technology the US is a third-world country, around 13th or lower globally. New technology must be integrated into all government agencies. All processes of government must change to use that technology properly. Not just military and intelligence processes.”

Owens, Hellman and Mularie agree that the Peace Corps’ strategic significance, soft-power global dispersal and high potential for public visibility offer an excellent federal telecommunity model. Hellman adds: “It’s hard to think of a better choice to demonstrate how a federal team distributed over the widest possible geographical area can use the most advanced telecommunications technology as a benign social tool — sharing American strengths and knowledge with other peoples, building peace, showing the world America’s best face. The face of efficiency. Of technology and government at their most humane. Of freedom.”

## Redefining civil society as information technology society.

It is a truism that ideas are the hinges of history. The idea that will necessarily underlie any concerted technological empowerment of the Peace Corps is the idea that advanced technology is integral to effective civil society. While this broader philosophical thesis exceeds the scope of this article, its salient point is that transforming the Corps entails not simply a fiscal decision but a revised technology policy. I noted above the historical confusion of advanced technology with militarism. In Marxism technology came to be seen as a tool of economic exploitation, demonized by philosophers like Herbert Marcuse as a dehumanizing force caricatured by Orwellian dystopias. These stereotypes contrast starkly with diversity-promoting, democratically empowering information technologies. Marx’s inspiration, the German idealist philosopher Hegel, was ignorant of the developmental stimuli required by science and technology. The social Darwinism that shaped 19th-century US society believed science unfolded spontaneously within the mythic historical processes imagined by Hegel. This supposition carried through into John Dewey’s pragmatism, influencing historian Thomas Kuhn’s “normal science” concept of scientific establishments passively explicating paradigms. Francis Fukuyama’s 1992 study The End of History and the Last Man made this Hegelianism explicit in a doctrine of linear political progress assuming inevitable scientific advance under adroit political administrators rather than proactive technological innovators. Fukuyama’s subordination of technological innovation to political administration continued in Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution (2002), espousing technology regulation. Military Organization in the Information Age: Lessons from the World of Business (1999, Fukuyama and Abram Shulsky) elevated political-administrative over technological processes (with the Wehrmacht as a case study), emphasizing information control rather than dissemination. This outlook pervades current federal failure proactively to nurture either governmental or private telecommunications development.

A fertile alternative politics of technology, combining theoretical cogency with unusual empirical foundations and according with recent knowledge management research, arises from the analyses of Admiral Owens, reflecting his post-Cold War reorganization of the US military and his experience as commander of the Sixth Fleet in 1990 and 1991. Until recently CEO of Canada-based Nortel, a global telecommunications firm, Owens’ geopolitical, governmental and information technology perceptions benefit from a unique conflux of strategic insights evolved in publications (e.g. America’s Information Edge, with Joseph S.Nye, Jr., Foreign Affairs, 1996; Lifting the Fog of War, with Ed Offley, 2000) and unpublished research. Owens believes America’s economy; quality of national life and security can progress optimally only by concerted government-led efforts to move not just the military but all peacetime society on to a substantively more sophisticated telecommunications level. In discussion with me he cited South Korea as a nation whose competitiveness challenges America’s significantly because of superior government vision in technology. “In intelligence management, national defense, and the effectiveness of day-to-day communication and administration, the US Government is today a technological underperformer by a significant margin,” Owens commented. He acknowledges that technological innovation cannot depend on flashes of fortunate private genius, military stimulation or mythic historical spontaneity but must be purposefully nurtured by peacetime institutions that facilitate and respond to development opportunities – an observation which, in the form in which Francis Bacon first cast it in the1600s, initiated the scientific era. Bacon’s statement “Knowledge is power” acquires new meaning for an age in which raw political or military power, however great, is constrained by the realities of peacetime knowledge-transmitting technology. These include the fact that civil society is now an information technology construct in which strategic policy cannot succeed without being well anchored in the optimal use and development of advanced information technology for peaceful purposes, since larger peacetime society originates the technological products that incidentally enable security. “We truly are in a new and different era,” Owens says. “New partnerships between government and private resources are necessary if we are to achieve technology’s virtually limitless potential to change society for the better. We must accept the seeming paradox that new technologies can bring us national security only if we resolve to use them calculatedly, and above all other purposes, to build a just and peaceful world.” Hellman adds: “Transforming the structures of our government through technology is a fundamental key to making America both more secure and more efficient in the 21st century. It’s not an option but a strategic imperative. It’s philosophically fitting, from a number of perspectives, that the Peace Corps should be empowered to lead the way in this evolution.



# The Great ICT4D Peace Corps Volunteer debate
August 10, 2011
By Lindsay Poirier
Source: http://www.ictworks.org/2011/08/10/great-peace-corps-debate/

Most people that I have met in the international development field have had strong opinions for or against involvement in the ICT field of the Peace Corps. I've toyed back and forth over whether to pursue this path after graduation for personal reasons. Most notably, I have questioned whether I'm willing to miss out on two and a half years of life with friends and family to live in a third world country where I know no one.

As I've taken on new, independent challenges, this has become less of the issue. Instead, through discussion with my network of new ICT4D friends, I have found that there are some career and sustainability factors that I should be taking into consideration.

Let's start out with the benefits of volunteering with the Peace Corps:

1. To be successful in a career in international development, you have to have international experience. Sustainability is greatly jeopardized when individuals with no experience living in a particular culture attempt to create solutions for their problems. Cultural understanding is absolutely vital for designing sustainable solutions. The Peace Corps provides volunteers experience in developing solutions for a unique living style, emphasizing the importance of ethnography in design.
2. The Peace Corps offers training for tackling development issues. Whichever field Peach Corps Volunteers (PCV) decide to pursue, they are given three months of training on the culture of the area they will be entering and on how to successfully implement projects in their field. This is essentially free education.
3. Your extended period of time living in one community allows you to create a real attachment with the people of that community and allows for a complete cultural immersion.
4. The Peace Corps offers the best benefit package of any volunteer corps. With a monthly living stipend, non-competitive government job placement, and partial student loan coverage upon completion of a Peace Corps tour, it is easy to see why most individuals interested in global development choose this route over others. It is difficult to even get loan deferrals for volunteer abroad trips, let alone loan repayment. While I'm sure these are not the main reasons any individual decides to devote a minimum of two and a half years of his/her time to life in a third world country, they are benefits that are weighed when choosing the best route.
5. The Peace Corps is a great opportunity for students right out of college to get a good amount of travel and life experience before settling into a stable career.

Taking all of this into consideration, the Peace Corps seems like a perfect way to get involved in international development. However, there are some vital points to take into consideration if the prospective volunteer's main goal is creating sustainable results. The mission of a PCV is divided into three main goals (taken directly from <https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/#mission>):

1. Helping the people of interested countries in meeting their need for trained men and women.
2. Helping promote a better understanding of Americans on the part of the peoples served.
3. Helping promote a better understanding of other peoples on the part of Americans.

Note how only one of these goals deals with development. While cultural understanding both internationally and domestically is greatly beneficial and necessary for maintaining peace and sharing ways of life, individuals who have the main goal of seeing results in economic development are likely are not looking to devote 2/3 of their efforts to spreading culture. This may be the goal for some, and that is great. I, personally, want to see results and efficiency.

Even more importantly, sending one individual with no experience with a particular region and culture and only three months of training is unquestionably not the most efficient way to tackle development issues. It's great that individuals are willing to donate their time to the noble cause of training men and women for economic growth, but without a strong foundation of knowledge on a particular region, a great deal of time is wasted on projects that do not sustain.

This is particularly true in the ICT field where projects need to take into consideration all sorts of community aspects, from cultural dilemmas, such as language barriers, to physical barriers, such as broadband or electrical issues. A better approach would be to send interested volunteers to areas where grassroots organizations and NGOs have already established projects and have people in the field that know a great deal about the culture of the region. This way volunteers and field workers can bounce ideas off each other to create the best solution.

Please note that I have great respect for all PCVs and the work that they have devoted to development. I am simply questioning whether this is the best model for my goals and vision.

I am an undergraduate student at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute studying Information Technology and Science, Technology, and Society. The focus of my studies is on International Development. I have a particular interest in incorporating ICTs in primary education in Sub-Saharan Africa.




# How I Used My Computer-Science Degree in the Peace Corps While Serving in Rural Africa
April 25, 2014
By Lyla Fujiwara
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
Source: http://www.nationaljournal.com/next-america/newsdesk/how-i-used-my-computer-science-degree-peace-corps-while-serving-rural-africa

*Lyla Fujiwara*, 25, completed two years of Peace Corps service in Rwanda in December 2013. As an information-and communication-technology educator, she worked with local community members at the Gashora Girls Academy of Science and Technology in Gashora and with entrepreneurs in Kigali, Rwanda, to improve their computer skills. She also led a camp for young women called Camp TechKobwa.

Fujiwara is part of the 22 percent of Peace Corps volunteers who report that they are members of a racial or ethnic minority. The Peace Corps recently announced plans to intensify efforts to recruit in underrepresented communities so that the agency's volunteer force reflects the diversity that increasingly defines the American people. Fujiwara shared her experience with The Next America.

In May 2010 I graduated from an Ivy League school with a bachelor's degree in computer science. All around me, classmates were securing entry-level jobs at the Googles and Microsoft of the world.

Compelled by the masses, one day during my senior year I found myself at an interview across from a very nice man who worked on printer-interfacing software. I sat there smiling and asking questions while a small voice in the back of my head screamed: "What am I doing here?"

I wasn't familiar with all the technical jargon my interviewer used, but more damning was the fact that I didn't care. I didn't get the job.

Nontraditional paths after university weren't readily discussed in the computer-science department. So I felt like a complete heretic when I began to consider the Peace Corps. As I went through the application process, I fretted about what this unconventional decision meant with respect to having a "normal" technology career. I wondered if what I had learned at Brown would become outdated after two years. Everyone was excited about hiring new computer-science graduates, but was there an expiration date on this enthusiasm? And in communities struggling to meet their basic needs, would my technical skills even be useful?

Still, something felt instinctively right about my decision to apply to the Peace Corps. After being in school for most of my life, I wanted a job with purpose and variety where I could see my skills impacting lives. In September 2011, I left home to serve in Rwanda as an education volunteer.

My initial fears about whether my skill set would be relevant in Rwanda were quickly assuaged. In short order, I was running two computer labs for my 270-student high school, administering the campus's technical equipment, and writing and teaching a computer literacy curriculum for the freshman class. I was also teaching the 20 girls who were focusing their studies on computer science and C++ programming.

It turns out the need for information-technology training in schools and other places where computers are used is huge.

When most people are asked about the major challenges surrounding technology in developing countries, their first thought is a lack of equipment. This is definitely a problem, but what's more frustrating is the lack of IT know-how to effectively use the equipment that's available. The primary school five minutes away from the high school where I worked had literally hundreds of donated laptops sitting in boxes because the IT teacher only had one week of training on how to use them. This was just the sort of unfortunate story I heard repeated by many of my fellow volunteers. The upside, though, is that one person with IT skills — like myself — can make a huge difference and put hundreds of dollars of existing equipment to good use.

Combining technology with education can have an even greater impact. Learning with technology fosters a culture of problem-solving and experimentation, which are skills that education systems around the world struggle to reinforce. Many students in my class subscribed to the philosophy that all problems had a single answer, and that the teacher was responsible for telling them this answer so they could memorize it for the test. I had little love for this methodology, so I focused on pushing my students to solve the problems themselves. For the first few assignments, I simply asked them to find errors in programs or fill in blanks. The computer would correct them when they were wrong and they could try again. By the end of the course, the students were independently programming a text-based version of tic-tac-toe.

I was not the only one using technology to reinforce critical thinking; local entrepreneurs have started holding high school technology competitions, and there are two burgeoning technology hubs in Kigali that organize events, lectures, and classes. Rwanda also recently hosted Transform Africa, a technology summit that included a youth component.

Furthermore, Peace Corps volunteers are especially well positioned to bridge an important gap: the divide between where most of the IT is happening (in cities) and where most of the population lives (in rural communities). This challenge of reaching the rural population was the idea behind my largest Peace Corps project, TechKobwa. TechKobwa is a girl's computer camp where students from disadvantaged backgrounds are exposed to and, hopefully, inspired by technology. Participants programmed games, created their own blogs, and attended panel discussions. Most classes were taught by local IT professionals.

Organizing the TechKobwa project was one of the defining parts of my Peace Corps experience and was made possible by the sheer excitement both Rwandans and the Peace Corps community had for technology projects.

The week before I returned to the United States, I contemplated how the Peace Corps affected me, and if it was worth it. I had been away from home for 30 months. From the start, Peace Corps trainers tout the invaluable soft skills learned during service, including adaptability, independence, cross-cultural communication, and a drastic lowering of standards as to what qualifies as a toilet.

They were right. As promised, I had to pull from all of these skills during my time in Rwanda. Thinking about my friends and coworkers, I realized that I also have a burgeoning networking of worldwide contacts that will come in handy if I decide to work in technology and development.

But, I was also immensely touched by the sincerity and humor of the other Peace Corps volunteers and Rwandans I worked with during my service, as well as the unimaginable kindness of my neighbors and,** **most poignantly, of my students. Their sheer drive, intelligence, and compassion were contagious.

The night before school ended, one of my brightest students talked about how she hadn't been interested in her computer studies, but after my class discovered she had a passion for programming. Others spoke about their ambitions for university and technology degrees. I left the classroom reeling with emotion.

Ultimately, the Peace Corps volunteer experience gives Americans the opportunity to invest in people — sometimes people who are dramatically different than them. The perspective, admiration, and inspiration you gain from service is more valuable than a fancy title or bullet point on a resume. It's something I will carry with me as I continue on to whatever comes next.




# 5 ways Peace Corps service is like 'Star Trek'
April 17, 2015
By Elizabeth Riley
excerpt: Comparing the similarities of Peace Corps service with the Star Trek universe.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/5-ways-peace-corps-service-is-like-star-trek/

As any Peace Corps Volunteer knows, there can be a lot of downtime during your service. Meetings are late, people don't show up to events they said they would, no one comes to school on a rainy day, time is just… slower.

My site mate Stacey and I have taken advantage of the downtime by watching "Star Trek." Sure, there are some good, science-fiction-y plot devices, but the heart and soul of the various series are the themes of exploration, humanity (and what exactly that means) and a demonstration of the greatness of Patrick Stewart. (Just kidding. Sort of.)

Through my viewing of "Star Trek," I've found five themes that relate to my Peace Corps service.

## 1. The Prime Directive

This is the overall governing policy of the United Federation of Planets. Basically, Starfleet officers are not supposed to get involved in the natural progression of a civilization or culture. Things get weird when we involve time travel so there is, of course, a Temporal Prime Directive: don't interfere in the natural progression of a timeline.

Introducing warp or time travel technology to civilizations that aren't there is a serious offense. Watching a culture get conquered by a vicious dictator isn't easy. But imagine the implications if the Federation got involved in every single dispute or introduced advanced technology to the human equivalent of cave men. If a group or civilization *asks* for help, on the other hand, it is typically given.

Of course, Peace Corps is kind of the opposite of the Prime Directive. We are *supposed* to get involved in the local culture. We're supposed to integrate and make friends and, ultimately, "change behaviors."

That's what I like about the Peace Corps: We live in a community, involve community members, identify needs and use a community's *strengths** *to solve a problem.

## 2. Cultivating family

"Star Trek" takes place in the 24th century. At this point we've developed warp technology and are exploring different planets, sectors and galaxies. Different species and civilizations can join the Federation and become Starfleet officers, leading to a rich diversity of officers and citizens. Naturally, some of these species have historical conflicts and not everyone gets along.

The definition of family comes up frequently in each iteration of the series, both the family we choose and the family we don't.

My happiness during my Peace Corps service is so inextricably linked with the family I have cultivated here. Like "Deep Space Nine*,*" we are a rag-tag bunch of Volunteers from all over the place, having a huge variety of experiences and backgrounds. But now we share this one thing — Peace Corps service in Jamaica — and it feels like we'll be in this secret little club that no one else *really* understands. The family that we choose and the one that we cultivate are often different, but both are essential to our (well, at least my) happiness.

## 3. The Federation is bureaucratic

The United Federation of Planets is the huge governing organization that oversees all of the goings-on in the universe. If that sounds like a big job, it is.

Well, guess what? The Peace Corps is a government organization. There are going to be rules that sometimes, on the surface at least, don't make sense. There is going to be *paperwork*, endless pages of forms to fill out.

## 4. What does culture mean?

At its core, "Star Trek" is about the exchange of cultures. During the 24th century, Earth has one unified government and is a member of the United Federation of Planets. Individuals still maintain their respective cultural identities, but borders, hunger and poverty have been "solved," which is why the Federation explores new planets and invites new species to join in the fun (and what fun it is!).

Before coming to the Peace Corps, I had a very rudimentary understanding of what culture was. I thought it extended to language, food, greetings, music and architecture. Now I realize it is *so much* more than that. It encompasses everything from the way people walk on the street to the etiquette they use in a business setting and how they clean their homes. Being cognizant of these differences and not getting frustrated when they impede our work is incredibly important to our mental health as PCVs.

## 5. Being an outsider

In each series, there is usually one or more "outsider" character: Spock, Worf, Data and Odo all serve this role in a variety of ways. They each have several episodes that focus on this status and how they wrestle with their identity. How can they really fit in with the Federation? Each of these outsider characters have to wrestle with their identities, relate to their fellow crewmembers and still do their jobs.

Obviously, being an outsider is a fundamental part of the Peace Corps experience. We are dispatched to foreign countries to perform a job. We are by definition outsiders. Never really fitting in is part of the job description. No matter how much we integrate, how many dead yards we attend or how much the kids love us, a little part of us will still be an outsider.

But going back home, it's hard to relate to the friends we left behind. We've just been through this huge experience that they can't begin to understand. It's hard to describe the Peace Corps experience, and even more difficult for family and friends back home to understand. This will define me from now on.



# Tech can reshape the U.S. Peace Corps and bridge political divides
December 17, 2016
Source: https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/17/tech-can-reshape-the-u-s-peace-corps-and-bridge-political-divides/

Earlier this week, President-elect Trump met with some of the top leaders of American tech companies. Some of these leaders are trying to find common ground after being on the receiving end of some of his sharp-worded tweets.

Like many of my friends in the tech community, I’m faced with the reality of a Trump presidency and searching for a way to honor the calls of President Obama and Secretary Clinton for national unity and a chance for the president-elect to lead.

My struggle comes from looking for common ground with a president-elect whose policy goals I largely do not support but recognizing from my time working in the Obama White House just how ineffective obstructionist politics can be for Americans who rely on a functioning federal government.

As we seek to unite a divided country, one unconventional area where we might find common ground, and discover a hidden opportunity for the tech community, is updating a historic government agency — the U.S. Peace Corps.

## Surprised? Let me explain…

In December 2013, President Barack Obama was preparing to meet with a group of U.S. tech leaders at the White House. I was the senior advisor for mobile and data innovation at the White House, and I asked Reed Hastings, the chief executive officer of Netflix — and, like myself, a Returned Peace Corps Volunteer — if he would like to join me for breakfast with the director of Peace Corps, Carrie Hessler-Radelet.

Reed enthusiastically replied, “Yes!”

Carrie and I met with Reed the morning before his meeting with the President, and then I walked him to the West Wing. Reed seemed to relish his discussion with the President, jokingly [offering the President a cameo in House of Cards](http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/obama-jokes-with-netflix-executive-about-house-of-cards). But I didn't think much else of Reed's visit until I saw media reports the following day. To everyone's amusement, [Reed considered the highlight of his day to be his breakfast with the director of the Peace Corps,](https://youtu.be/XyZCF95vcYk?t=4m17s) where they discussed how the agency had been influenced and changed by technology.

Reed's conversation with Carrie at breakfast that morning sparked two new questions:

* As the length of time a new tech startup goes abroad has been condensed from 4-5 years to 12-18 months — could recently returned Peace Corps volunteers supply the boost Silicon Valley needs to grow businesses successfully and responsibly in the most remote parts of the world?
* Before the end of the next president's first term, it's estimated that there will be [99 percent cell phone adoption](https://www.statista.com/statistics/232594/mobile-wireless-penetration-worldwide/) worldwide — and [1 billion smart phone users](https://techcrunch.com/2015/06/02/6-1b-smartphone-users-globally-by-2020-overtaking-basic-fixed-phone-subscriptions/). How should the Peace Corps staff up, train up and partner up to better leverage and teach tech in the most remote regions of the world?

## Peace Corps’ got Entrepreneurial Talent

Every year more than 3,500 Americans finish their Peace Corps service, mostly in rural areas in more than 60 countries. The Peace Corps has long acted as the last mile of international development, but it could also become the last mile of critical tech training. It has an unrivaled footprint of volunteers canvassing the planet — they are ambassadors of culture, teachers of water-saving agricultural techniques and emerging leaders in their own right. They're building deep, meaningful relationships with local communities.

Historically, federal agencies, non-profits and non-governmental aid organizations have heavily recruited this rich talent pool of international experience and resilience. One of the many positive side effects of the tech community working closely with the Peace Corps is also tapping into this rich talent pool of Returned Peace Corps Volunteers. These resilient Americans can supply the boost tech companies needs to grow businesses successfully and responsibly in the most remote parts of the world.

As an example, more than thirteen years ago I served as a business and technology volunteer in Nicaragua. Based on the challenges my neighbors and I faced in making calls to the United States, I co-founded a small phone company in 2005. We erected 80-foot internet towers in rural villages to enable Nicaraguans to call the United States and other countries at a tenth of the price charged by established carriers. Eventually our company, Llamadas Heladas, became one of the largest phone companies in Nicaragua.

I am not alone. Other Peace Corps Volunteers have also gone on to start much more successful tech companies, including Reed — who served as a high school math teacher in Swaziland — and Amy Pressman, who served in Honduras before co-founding her billion-dollar tech startup, Medallia. And it's not just tech startups, Knight Foundation, with more than two billion dollars in assets to support, among other things, the development of civic tech, is run by Alberto Ibargüen, who served in Venezuela.

## Building a Digital Peace Corps

President-elect Trump should choose a Peace Corps director with technology in his or her DNA. Critically, the next director needs to make technology a priority in every facet of the organization, from staffing and training to the partnerships it builds.** **

Why? Great, tech-powered, business ideas can come from anywhere. Take Lyft, for example, a billion-dollar Silicon Valley company modeled after the successful ride-pooling in Zimbabwe. Or consider Ushahidi, a popular crowd-mapping tool used during domestic disasters — created in Nairobi.

Facebook powers more than a billion people's social media identities but the Government of India built the world's largest biometric identity system for more than 1.2 billion people in a fraction of the time. One of the most successful mobile money companies, M-pesa, was not founded in America, but in Kenya. Analog versions of Deliveroo, Postmates and Munchery were implemented decades ago in countries such as India and Nicaragua.

Ultimately, by bringing the Peace Corps into the 21st century, we can empower communities across the globe to take advantage of emerging technologies that can positively impact their lives.

## Digital Peace Corps (beta)

Peace Corps Director Hessler-Radelet has made dramatic improvements at the agency, including significant structural changes that make it easier to apply to serve as a volunteer — reducing the application process from several days to less than an hour. The Peace Corps has also expanded its digital footprint and improved its outreach, recruiting and marketing, resulting in a 100 percent increase in applications over the last two years.

The agency's Director of Innovation, Patrick Choquette, [has formed strategic partnerships with software firms, such as Duolingo](http://technical.ly/dc/2016/06/03/peace-corps-duolingo-language-courses/), a language training software company. The Peace Corps has also been [leveraging local knowledge to crowdsource invaluable geographic information](https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/mapping-and-the-power-of-the-crowd-peace-corps-response-to-disaster-in-vanuatu/) that can be incredibly helpful in the wake of disasters.

Building on these successes, the next director has the opportunity to make the Peace Corps an important player in spreading the benefits of emerging technologies — enabling this historic agency to have as much impact in the 21st century as it had in the 20th. The wave of technology change is only growing. Whether it lifts or further isolates many parts of the world is being decided now.

The next Peace Corps director could help shape this future in the following ways:

## Staff Up

* Establish a Tech Corps – Similar to the Obama Administration's recruitment of tech talent after the Healthcare.gov meltdown, the Peace Corps should recruit 80 technical volunteers — 10 for each region of the world where volunteers serve — building open-source tools other regional volunteers can leverage.
* Launch Open Source Software Competition – The Peace Corps should host an annual contest to identify the Top 10 open-source projects, built by members of the Tech Corps, and give winners financial and developer support to deploy their tools worldwide.
* Partner with USAID and Local NGOs – The United States Agency for International Development is building technical solutions — from mobile money to blockchain — that will need practical and technical assistance on the ground. Tech Corps and other volunteers could help train locals to run and maintain the technology being implemented.

## Train Up

* Expand TechHire globally – My last assignment at the White House was creating [TechHire](https://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/technology/techhire), which brings together businesses, coding boot camps and local governments to help those without a college degree learn to code and fill more than half a million vacant tech jobs. The Peace Corps, in collaboration with USAID, could expand TechHire globally — supporting the development of coding boot camps around the world.
* Build makerspaces – Work with local organizations to establish and build out makerspaces to teach locals about invaluable technologies such as 3-D printing, robotics and solar power.
* Put artisans online – Teach local artisans how to sell their goods on sites such as Etsy, eBay and Shopify, or show them how to successfully crowd-fund to acquire working capital needed for business growth.

## Partner Up

* Form partnerships with S. tech companies – Many of these tech companies have not only developed some of the world's most innovative software and hardware but have also expressed lofty goals to make a difference in the world. The Peace Corps should work with companies like Twilio or telecoms, for example, to donate text messages for use by local healthcare clinics and others, similar to [ChatSalud](https://twitter.com/peacecorps/status/728670410347175936).
* Launch E-book Drives – Partner with Amazon, Kobo and other major e-book merchants to allow consumers to donate e-books to students abroad exploiting the proliferation of smartphones that have dramatically lowered barriers to accessing e-book content.
* Establish a Returned Peace Corps Volunteer Innovation Fund – The top social entrepreneurs and accelerator programs — such as Echoing Green, Knight Foundation, Omidyar Network and Skoll Foundation, among many others — could host an annual event to review applications to fund the best ideas from volunteers on the verge of returning, giving them a path to stay in their local countries to make even greater impacts.

Finding common ground with someone whose policy goals you may strongly disagree with is incredibly challenging. But this isn't about any one of us or the president-elect. This is about coming together as Americans, with the Peace Corps and the National Peace Corps Association, to help evenly distribute our future to the people who need it most — the communities Peace Corps Volunteers are uniquely trained to serve.



===== News =====

Volunteers have been known to make headlines through their commitment to serve, by working on sustainable projects with their communities, and by bringing fresh ideas to long-standing challenges.

Stories of Volunteers using ICTs and digital technologies to make a difference in their communities capture the imagination and interest of the media as well, helping to bring recognition to the hard work of Volunteers and their counterparts, students, and communities, and to also inspire others to do the same.



# Join the Peace Corps, Go Online
May 1, 1999
By David Briscoe
The Associated Press
Source: http://cjonline.com/stories/050199/new*peacecorps.shtml#.whk3eryrkrt

**WASHINGTON** -- Peace Corps volunteers often live in rural dwellings without a phone or TV, but a big majority -- 72 percent -- now have easy access to a computer.

That is more than have running water in their generally humble living quarters -- 67 percent -- and about the same percentage as those with electricity, according to a survey filled out by three-fourths of the 6,700 overseas volunteers.

"The world is changing, and the Peace Corps is changing with it," Peace Corps Director Mark Gearan said in an interview. But he acknowledged the results were surprising.

The survey, sent out last year and compiled this week, shows in addition to widespread computer access, 60 percent of volunteers have easy access to a fax machine, 53 percent have e-mail and 38 percent use the Internet.

Despite that, two-thirds of volunteers still live in small towns, villages or rural areas or on outer islands, and only 34 percent have a telephone and 32 percent a television. Volunteers receive a minimal living allowance and a readjustment allowance after they return from the normal two-year stint.

It isn't yet on the new volunteer's list of recommended gear, but Patrick Gamman from Tillamook, Ore., took a solar-powered laptop computer with him to a remote village in the Philippines.

"He rides a horse to work. He lives in a former chicken coop on stilts. He has no electricity and no running water. But he's writing on a computer," said Gearan, who recently visited Gamman in his village.

"The potential for developing countries to literally leapfrog and gain all the benefits of information is enormous," Gearan said.



# Peace Corps moves into information technology
July 1, 2000
Source: http://www.techknowlogia.org/tkl*active*pages2/currentarticles/main.asp?issuenumber=6&filetype=html&articleid=163

The Peace Corps was created in response to a challenge issued by then presidential candidate John F. Kennedy. After a day of campaigning for the presidency, he arrived at the University of Michigan October 14, 1960, at 2:00 a.m., to find 10,000 students waiting to hear him speak. There he asked how many of them would be willing to serve their country and the cause of peace by living and working in the developing world?

After becoming President, John F. Kennedy established the Peace Corps to promote world peace and friendship. Since then, over 150,000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps in over 134 countries. Currently, more than 7,000 Peace Corps volunteers are serving in 77 countries, working to bring clean water to communities, teach children, help start new small businesses, and stop the spread of AIDS.

Over the years, and more recently, Peace Corps Volunteers worldwide are confirming that the demand for information technology (IT) skills is increasing worldwide at an exponential rate.

In response to these demands, Director of the Peace Corps, Mark Schneider, in March 2000 announced a Peace Corps IT program to recruit and place computer specialists in developing countries. Under this new program, volunteers will teach communities how to operate computers and applications, teach at literacy centers, and assist with small business web page design centers. In June 2000, he further outlined the program for IT by announcing an e-initiative. This will expand the role that Peace Corps Volunteers currently play in bringing the power of IT to the task of poverty reduction. According to a speech made by Director Schneider on June 7, 2000, key elements of the e-initiative are the following:

**First**, the Peace Corps will build on its traditional strengths of local community presence, knowledge of local customs and language, and success at grassroots project development and execution. They will enable technology projects that are financed by other organizations to become accessible to students and businesses in rural areas. They are also proposing to harness IT to help resource-poor communities in order to advance their development goals in education, health, environmental protection, agriculture production and small business enterprises, and municipal development.

**Second**, to recruit Peace Corps Volunteers with IT skills, Peace Corps created a new category for Information Technology generalists and specialists to give computer experts a place to identify their skills for the first time. This also helps Peace Corps offices more clearly identify where and how Volunteers with these skills can work.

**Third**, they are undertaking a large "training of trainers" process for Volunteers who are comparative experts in using IT but not necessarily in teaching others how to use it. They also want to expand the training programs to ensure that Volunteers and their counterparts become proficient in IT teaching techniques.

**Fourth**, Peace Corps want to see Volunteers expand community computer literacy centers, micro and small business web page design centers; and school-based learning centers expanded around the world.

The e-initiative will provide a structured and more systematic way for Peace Corps Volunteers to incorporate IT into existing and future projects. Prior to this more formalized approach, Peace Corps Volunteers have already provided numerous IT related services. They are:

- teaching counterparts to use computer hardware and to use basic productivity and connectivity software, and where appropriate, how to design and establish web pages
- helping to set up and run school computer labs and are teaching counterparts to take over the responsibilities for the facilities and the teaching
- helping to set up and run community telecenters
- working with entrepreneurs and teaching them to use e-mail and the Internet to promote their businesses and to communicate with customers. They are teaching them to use productivity software to improve internal management efficiency of their businesses.
- helping students participate in environmental and writing programs that involve the use of IT in collaboration with students in other countries

> "Today, I would like to challenge America’s information giants to join the Peace Corps e-initiative by contributing funds, hardware, software, and teaching modules to a Peace Corps e-Partnership Fund. The Fund will permit us to support hundreds of new Volunteer information technology projects—developed at the grassroots with community, NGO, small business, and local government partners."

> — Director Mark Schneider, in his remarks on Peace Corps Day, March 6, 2000



# Techies opt for simplicity / Former dot-comers joining Peace Corps
May 30, 2001
excerpt: "Former dot-comers joining Peace Corps."
Source: http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/techies-opt-for-simplicity-former-dot-comers-2915614.php

The Bay Area's dot-com bust has been a boon for the Peace Corps, with a stampede of high-tech refugees ditching their start-ups to sign up.

As the organization celebrates its 40th anniversary, applications at the San Francisco office have jumped 55 percent this year, and Peace Corps recruiters find themselves making pitches in rooms packed with potential applicants.

The sudden surge comes after several lean years for the Peace Corps. With the Bay Area's economy humming along in top gear, the corps simply could not compete with the high-tech industry's fat salaries and spectacular stock options.

"It was awfully hard for people not to jump on that bandwagon," said Dennis McMahon, spokesman for the corps' San Francisco office.

Now that unemployment lines are teeming with former dot-comers and the Bay Area economy is sputtering, the "toughest job you'll ever love" is looking more attractive.

The San Francisco regional office, which serves Northern California, Hawaii and Nevada, saw 184 applications in March and April alone, McMahon said. That's up from 119 during the same period last year.

Nationwide, the Peace Corps has seen its largest number of volunteers -- 7, 300 stationed in 76 nations since October -- in 26 years.

McMahon said a good many of those coming through the door are former dot- comers fleeing sinking ships or simply looking for a change.

"They're starting to wonder if they really want to spend the rest of their lives staring at a computer screen," said Jessica Hsu, a former dot-comer bound for a two-year stint in Haiti. "The Peace Corps allows them to dedicate themselves to something that helps people and something they can feel passionate about."

Hsu, 25, left the online advertising firm i-traffic.com in January. She and other dot-com dropouts said the simplicity of life in the corps is an attractive alternative to the long hours and grueling workloads of the high- tech fast lane.

"When you work with a startup, you put in a lot of hours," said Nicole, a 30-year-old systems analyst who declined to give her last name because her boss doesn't know she's bailing out. "I worked really hard for a really long time. Not that Peace Corps isn't hard, but I want to do something different."

Nicole survived two rounds of layoffs at the Cupertino firm where she has spent the past nine months -- but doesn't want to be there when the bottom falls out at the cash-starved company. She briefly considered looking for another job but decided it was time to slow down.

"I know I have the skills to get another job that would pay me a six-figure salary like I was getting," she said. "But I want to focus on basics and not worry about what kind of car I drive and how much money I have in the bank. I'm disillusioned by all of that."

Computer whizzes will find themselves right at home in the Peace Corps, which is becoming more and more high-tech and business-oriented.

As the world grows increasingly dependent upon computer technology and the instantaneous dissemination of information, underdeveloped nations are scrambling to keep pace. The growing global marketplace places further strains on the emerging economies of Latin America, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. The Peace Corps is only too happy to help.

Thirteen percent of the corps' service is now in the business sector, helping launch small businesses, farmer and artisan cooperatives and the like. And a growing segment of the organization is dedicated to information technology and computer literacy.

The corps sent its first team of information technology volunteers to Belize last June. And it joined forces with AOL Time Warner and Hewlett- Packard in October to provide volunteers with computers, modems, printers and digital cameras.

"The stereotypical image of the Peace Corps is going into rural, undeveloped countries," McMahon said. "But as the world has changed, Peace Corps assignments have changed."

Many dot-comers said the Peace Corps shares many similarities with the high- tech world. Both encourage individualism while emphasizing teamwork. Both favor people who can "think outside the box." And some say both appeal to an underlying altruism.

"Most people who work with computers are really pretty idealistic," said Therese Lung, a 39-year-old computer engineer who left the high-tech world about a year ago and is considering the Peace Corps. "A lot of people I've worked with really yearn for that sense of doing something meaningful."

Lung said she's simply grown weary of computers after 17 years in the business and wants to use her skills to help others improve their lives.

"A lot of people have felt that urge but haven't found it in their work," she said. "You just work on your one piece of code in your little cubicle and you lose your sense of the world.



# IT Volunteers Recharged by Peace Corps
September 1, 2001
By Melissa Solomon
Source: http://www.computerworld.com/article/2583573/it-skills-training/it-volunteers-recharged-by-peace-corps.html

As vice president of operations at Neuberger Berman Inc., Mirella Shannon helped lead the New York-based financial services firm. Since leaving her post last year, she's been helping to rebuild a nation.

Shannon is one of 25 volunteers assigned to the Peace Corps' IT initiative in Belize launched in July last year. She's built computer labs, trained teachers and is now teaching in a new bachelor's degree program at the University of Belize.

"It's hard work, in that you have to be a creative problem-solver," Shannon says. "I had a large staff. I had secretaries. I had copiers. I had just about everything at my disposal. And here, I have my head and my two hands."

It was Shannon's daughter who started researching the Peace Corps last year, but it got Shannon thinking. "I was a '60s child," she says. "I wanted to do it then but couldn't."

As they say, better late than never.

For young volunteers, "I think this is a wonderful training ground," Shannon says. "You're going to do problem-solving you're never going to see [elsewhere]." For more experienced workers, she says, "it is a method to re-energize yourself, to get your hands into it again."

Bob and Jo Link also had dreams of joining the Peace Corps after college. But when Bob was drafted into the Vietnam War, those dreams faded. Like Shannon's, his dreams resurfaced through his daughter, Jenna, who now serves as a teacher in the Philippines.

At first, the Links thought it was a crazy idea. They had good jobs in Hawaii: Jo was a teacher, and Bob was a network/systems manager at Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Corp.

"Then we said, 'Why not? Life is short. Let's go for one more adventure,' " recalls Bob Link, who teaches an introductory computer class to primary school teachers with his wife in Belize's capital city, Belmopan.

"Some of these people have never seen a computer before," he says. "In a small country like this, you can have a big impact. So it feels good."

The Links aren't sure what they'll do when their service ends next summer, but they say they'd like to continue to serve others. "It kind of opens your world up a little bit," Bob Link says.

When asked what she'll do after her service ends next August, Shannon pauses.

"I don't know," she says. "Isn't that a wonderful answer?



# A Technology Corps - Efforts to find Peace Corps-like roles for technologists gain momentum
November 1, 2001
Source: https://www.technologyreview.com/s/401245/a-technology-corps/

It was 2:00 a.m. on October 14, 1960. Ten thousand students were waiting in front of the student union building at the University of Michigan. As the weary candidate climbed the steps, the audience began chanting his name.

Senator John F. Kennedy had just flown in from New York, straight from a television debate with Vice President Richard Nixon. He spoke to the students off the cuff, delivering a speech that in just a few sentences would launch the Peace Corps. "How many of you who are going to be doctors are willing to spend your days in Ghana? Technicians or engineers, how many of you are willing to work in the Foreign Service and spend your lives traveling around the world?"

Nobody knows why Kennedy picked that moment, in the middle of the night on a college campus in the Midwest, to float the idea of the Peace Corps. But the effect was electric. The vision was that by learning to serve, a new generation would learn to lead. They would return from the field as stronger people, better not just from learning how to apply their talents, but from having learned much more about themselves and their place in the world. "There is not enough money in all America to relieve the misery of the underdeveloped world in a giant and endless soup kitchen," Kennedy later declared. "But there is enough know-how and knowledgeable people to help those nations help themselves."

In August of 1961, the first Peace Corps volunteers stepped onto the tarmac in Accra, Ghana. By the end of 1963, 7,300 volunteers were working in more than 40 countries; by 1966, the ranks had swelled to more than 15,000 in about 60 countries. And that, alas, was the peak. Under the pall of the war in Vietnam, the movement shrank.

The good news is that President Clinton "expanded" the Peace Corps-to 10,000. The bad news is that pitifully few Peace Corps workers have the kind of training that enables them to transfer the best ideas from Western labs into developing countries. Most volunteers have backgrounds in business, education, health care or ecology. A thin slice of the pie, about four percent, falls into the category of "other." And in that sliver you find technologists. It's a hugely disappointing minority.

Why so few computer scientists and engineers join the Peace Corps is unclear. Perhaps it's because most technologists are trained in environments that require a lot of infrastructure and support in order to push through to the next discovery. It's hard to break new technological ground in a subsistence village. Another factor could be that there's a very well-oiled path from the university into the high-tech job sector. Most people who start down that path stay on it.

There are, however, rays of hope. One fledgling approach that directly addresses the "four percent problem" is Geekcorps ([www.geekcorps.org](http://www.geekcorps.or)). Launched by Ethan Zuckerman, who cofounded the successful Web service company Tripod, Geekcorps sends SWAT teams of technologists into the field to give the world's poorest people access to the Internet. The Geekcorps folk work with local communities to build the infrastructure needed to bootstrap local businesses. In an interesting echo of the Peace Corps, this outfit too began in Ghana. In fact, that's where the idea first came to Zuckerman: he went there on a Fulbright scholarship in 1993.

Geekcorps volunteers spend four months on the ground in developing nations, working to help partner businesses on a technical level. This corps of people and backers is largely drawn from the pool of successful U.S. technocrats. One volunteer, for example, came from the management and technology consulting firm Accenture, where she became an advocate for more corporate involvement in developing-world efforts. The firm now has several initiatives looking at how developing nations can embrace information technology to achieve economic growth. Getting a taste of the reality in Ghana, through one of its employees, translated into boundless energy and fresh leadership for Accenture-and that energy is what keeps these companies thriving.

Often, through these experiences, new opportunities arise for both volunteers and their partners in developing nations. Armenia Nercessian de Oliveira was a United Nations official for 16 years. Working in hardship countries, she saw many beautiful local handcrafts and was struck by what happened to them en route to the world market. In Africa, she saw handcrafted masks being sold for $15; back in the States, Bloomingdale's would sell the same mask for $300. Enter Novica United, founded by Nercessian with her daughter and son-in-law. Novica applies an Amazon-like approach to the marketing and distribution of local handcrafts from around the world. By connecting local offices in dozens of countries to the Internet, Novica has organized a vast online catalogue of goods created by thousands of regional artists. These items can then be sold directly to consumers at far below Bloomingdale's prices, returning a much greater profit to the artists.

For the recipient, each little gift, each product Novica ships, is a key that opens a doorway to another part of the world-a tangible, evocative connection to a living artisan, a person with a name, face and life story. Novica profits because its networked approach eliminates legions of middlemen. At the same time, the company is promoting a new kind of savvy eco-consumerism. This is a "good karma" company par excellence.

Novica's business, if it succeeds, could help conserve indigenous crafts and cultures. Like Geekcorps, it is pursuing a path that heightens public awareness, enriches communities, elevates tastes and deepens sensibilities. As technology evolves, it is important, and I would argue critical, to be able to hold in one hand an ingenious handmade toy from Ghana and in the other some sort of beeping, blinking, battery-powered, computer-infused techno-toy. Pondering the difference between the two will help us come to grips with what sorts of artifacts we want to surround ourselves with and why.

In my last column, I argued how vital it is for scientists and technologists to get into the field and immerse themselves in reality, up to their eyeballs in different ecologies, different cultures, different ways of thinking and doing. Now more than ever, the world is our laboratory. We are connected to each other through a fresh matrix of instant communication and easy travel. Burgeoning masses of people are constantly transforming the world. Humans have changed the climate, reshaped the land, harnessed rivers and extinguished species. Science gives us tools to change the world in incredible ways and at a frightening pace. But it can also help us restore some of what has been lost; it is also our compass for navigating the future. The question is: Who knows how to wield that compass?

The answer cannot come solely from scientists who have lived their lives in a lab. It must come from a new generation of technologists who have an active, firsthand sense of the world: scientists who know what the spirit of service means because they have served; engineers who have not just a textbook understanding of a problem, but who have had liberating experiences in settings that range from inner cities to outer wildernesses; inventors who know not only how to invent things, but how the processes of invention can help nourish a healthy, sustainable community.

The idea of dispatching volunteers with technological expertise to different parts of the world is gaining momentum. The MIT Media Laboratory, in collaboration with Harvard University's Center for International Development, recently launched a consortium called "Digital Nations." The consortium aims at bringing a broad set of next-generation technology projects, from e-commerce to health technology, to people in developing regions. The U.S. Department of State formed the Global Technology Corps, which enlists volunteers to share their skills in a number of areas, such as Web development or information science, with people around the globe. The leaders of the G8 (major industrialized countries) formed the Digital Opportunity Task Force to work on bridging the digital divide. Venture groups from Softbank to the World Bank are actively spurring new economic activity in developing regions.

This is encouraging news, but there's a long way to go. Right now, only seven graduates of MIT and four from Caltech are enrolled in the Peace Corps. And that just won't do.



# Guatemalan Municipalities Begin Mapping Their Futures With GIS
October 1, 2002
By Luis Fernandez
Region: IAP
Post: Guatemala
project: Guatemala - GIS Municipalities
excerpt: Guatemalan Municipalities Begin Mapping Their Futures With GIS
Source: http://www.esri.com/news/arcnews/winter0203articles/guatemalan-municipalities.html

In the fall of 2000, when Peace Corps volunteer Janet O'Callaghan arrived in Joyabaj, El Quich, in western Guatemala, she soon realized that no accurate map of the municipality existed. In fact no one who worked in the municipality could exactly say how many communities there were or where they were located.

O'Callaghan is one of 17 municipal development Peace Corps volunteers working in rural planning offices throughout Guatemala. A primary task of the municipal development volunteers is supporting local governments' efficiency in the areas of management capacity, delivery of services, and execution of projects.

With more than 10 years of GIS awareness with an aviation consulting firm, she realized that what her planning office needed was GIS capability. GIS software would help it create an accurate basemap and manage its small but growing database of information.

Before long, she was in touch with Geosistec (Guatemala City), the local Esri distributor, and had acquired ArcView for use by the planning office. A search of potential data sources put her in contact with the Guatemalan office of the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which is part of the U.S. Embassy mission in Guatemala. NIMA has ARC Digitized Raster Graphics (ADRG) on CD for all of Guatemala. Using the ADRG maps as her base and talking with knowledgeable locals, O'Callaghan was able to create the first accurate basemap of Joyabaj.

Once an accurate basemap was created, the planning office began using ArcView to create simple maps displaying basic demographic and social information such as population, education, and crop distribution. One of the first maps created displayed which communities had potable water, electricity, latrines, schools, and a health center. This map showed very quickly the degree of poverty faced by most of the municipalities' 117 communities. While many of the communities have some structure that serves as a school, most do not have a potable water system or adequate access to a health center. This map was distributed to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and governmental organizations (GOs) working in Joyabaj to help them understand the distribution of poverty in the municipality.

Another map displayed the communities where the 12 NGOs and GOs were working. This latter map revealed that many of these organizations were duplicating efforts by working in the same communities while other communities received no support. This information is being used to help coordinate the future work programs of these organizations.

The mayor of Joyabaj, Raul Perez, used these maps at several regional meetings as an introduction to his municipality. Perez's profiling of these maps generated tremendous interest in GIS among Peace Corps volunteers, other municipalities, and NGOs. They began contacting O'Callaghan asking for similar maps of their municipalities. Realizing that there was the potential for many rural municipalities to begin using GIS if they had access to training, she requested a change in work focus from the Peace Corps so she could begin working with other municipalities. She also contacted Geosistec, Esri, and NIMA, requesting help to bring GIS capabilities to these rural planning offices.

In the spring of 2002 O'Callaghan began her first three training sessions in the departments of Alta Verapaz and Baja Verapaz in central Guatemala. These municipalities were chosen because of the level of computer skills of the planning staff and the quality of their computers. The five Guatemalans and two Peace Corps volunteers who attended proclaimed the first three training sessions a success.

O'Callaghan spent a week in each of the municipalities. She installed ArcView, several useful scripts and extensions, ADRG maps for the municipality, and area-specific data she had compiled. By using data specific to the municipality for training, the trainees could quickly realize the benefits of the system and visualize direct applications of the software. One trainee in Fray Bartolom de las Casas who was familiar with GPS realized he could now add the GPS points he had of forest fires and quickly plot the areas, print maps, and provide statistics to the Guatemalan forest service (the Instituto Nacional de Bosques).

Formal training took only two days, and after that trainees began creating basemaps of their respective municipalities. By the end of the week each municipality had created a draft basemap and joined up and displayed some basic demographic data.

With the success of the first three municipalities, the program was expanded to include nine additional municipalities, bringing the total of rural municipalities using ArcView in Guatemala to 12. Overall, 28 Guatemalans and 12 Peace Corps volunteers received basic GIS training from O'Callaghan during the spring and summer of 2002. All municipalities have created basemaps and are currently using the program to display their demographic and social information. In learning to use ArcView, these rural municipalities are laying a foundation for more advanced applications such as cadastral mapping, forestry surveys, and urban planning.

In August 2002 O'Callaghan completed her two-year commitment to the Peace Corps. She turned over the GIS training program to another Peace Corps volunteer who will continue to work with Geosistec, Esri, and NIMA and provide training to additional municipalities.

The municipalities that received training are Cahabn, Alta Verapaz; Chisec, Alta Verapaz; Fray Bartolom de las Casas, Alta Verapaz; San Cristbal, Alta Verapaz; San Juan Chamelco, Alta Verapaz; Salama, Baja Verapaz; Chiche, El Quich; San Antonio Ilotenango, El Quich; San Juan Cotzal, El Quich; Santa Cruz del Quich, El Quich; Ro Hondo, Zacapa; and Esquipulas, Chiquimula.



# U.S. to Help Poor Countries Access Information Technology
March 4, 2003
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/texttrans/2003/03/20030305102102kmcconne@pd.state.gov0.0325281.xml#axzz4vg12qkrj

The United States launched an initiative to bring the benefits of information and communications technology (ICT) to entrepreneurs and small businesses in developing countries.

The Digital Freedom Initiative (DFI) -- a joint program of the departments of Commerce and State, U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Peace Corps and USA Freedom Corps, and business partners Hewlett Packard and Cisco Systems -- will place volunteers in small businesses to share business knowledge and technology expertise. The program will be piloted in Senegal, according to a USAID press release.

At a White House meeting announcing the initiative, Commerce Secretary Don Evans called DFI "an exciting new model of how different parts of the federal government, the development community, the private sector and developing nations can join forces for progress."

The DFI reflects President Bush's commitment to encouraging innovative foreign aid policies that "encourage wealth creation, economic and political freedom, the rule of law and human rights," Evans said. The initiative "builds an environment for technology-led economic development," he said.

Senegal was chosen as the first DFI country because "it is one of the best-run countries in the developing world," Andrew Natsios, USAID administrator, said at the meeting. Planners expect the program to eventually help more than 360,000 small businesses in Senegal, he said.

"There is no better tool for Africa's great leap forward than ICT," Senegal's president Abdoulaye Wade said by video at the meeting.

Volunteers will come from both partner companies and Peace Corps.

"Peace Corps has a long history of information and communication technology-based projects, Gaddi Vasquez, the agency's director, said at the conference. The Peace Corps currently has more than 1,500 volunteers working on ICT and many more involved with information technology through education programs, he said.

DFI will focus on promoting productivity and business process innovation, creating a financial infrastructure for entrepreneurs, building a foundation for growth and ownership, and developing a framework for policy and regulatory reform, according to a Peace Corps press release.

"Technology can help unlock the potential of individuals, communities and countries," said Carley Fiorina, chairman and chief executive officer of Hewlett Packard. She also appeared at the meeting. She said the company has learned that to be effective helping poor communities it must donate talent as well as money and equipment.

Fiorina said only 10 percent of the world's population can afford to buy the computer company's products. By making technology more accessible, the company is also hoping to develop future markets, she said.

Types of DFI projects Hewlett-Packard envisions include helping communities develop publicly owned "cyber cafes" and partnering with local entrepreneurs to develop "local relevant [Internet] content."

Vasquez highlighted another example of the project's possibilities. He described a Peace Corps volunteer in Africa who helped a group of artisans develop a Web site that they use to market their products worldwide.

Cisco Systems Chairman John Morgridge at the meeting talked about another possibility. He said it can further his company's program of providing classes over the Internet to developing countries on how to use information technology.

"Information technology is changing the world," Hernando de Soto, president of the Institute for Liberty and Democracy in Lima, Peru, said at the meeting.



# Peace Corps Promotes Health via Mobile Phone
March 23, 2010
Region: AF
Post: Namibia
project: Namibia - mHealth
excerpt: Namibia PCV uses mobile phones for health-care messages
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/article/2010/03/201003231649371ejrehsif0.908642.html#axzz3namheu00

**Washington** – The Peace Corps, the United States' premier overseas volunteer agency, is using mobile phones to reach, train and inform health care workers in Africa.

"A top priority for me as director of the Peace Corps is to create new ways to harness the innovation and creativity of our volunteers to further Peace Corps' impact and project sustainability," and that includes more mobile phone messaging, Aaron Williams told *America.gov*.

"Volunteers in the 21st century who come to the Peace Corps are technologically savvy with more [electronic] gear and knowledge than we could ever give them," Williams added. "We're running to catch up with them."

A case in point, he said, is health education software developed by two volunteers in Namibia — Rashid Khan and Jennifer Moore — using the mobile phone–based short messaging service (SMS), also known as text messaging, to communicate on issues such as HIV/AIDS and family planning.

Khan recently described how the program operates on a mobile technology Web site: "We are working in Namibia with three organizations using a modified version of PlaySMS we've dubbed HERSMS that implements a round-robin style of forwarding messages that aren't handled by keywords to a pool of volunteers who can then respond to the query and have it relayed back to the client." He added: "We use the system to create dialogues, support-line style, between volunteers and clients about sexual health topics. The software tracks keywords in the conversations and associates them with themes, which are then graphed."

Work on health and HIV/AIDS — a major focus for the 7,600 volunteers who have dedicated two years of their lives to living and working in 76 countries — represents 18 percent of all Peace Corps volunteer jobs.

In Namibia, where 1,150 volunteers have served since the country achieved independence in 1990, many of the 134 current volunteers use the SMS program while teaching information and communication technology (ICT) techniques in conjunction with other subjects such as English and mathematics. They also run community activities for their students, such as libraries and computer labs, boys' and girls' clubs, HIV/AIDS clubs, and computer classes for students, teachers and community members.

In education, which accounts for 33 percent of the Peace Corps' volunteers, ICT is also increasingly important as a tool to expand learning opportunities through the use of radio, video and computers, according to a Peace Corps document. ICT not only broadens access to education but "makes learning more interactive, provides teachers with access to classroom materials, and enables classrooms around the world to communicate and collaborate," it said.

Director Williams said in a recent speech that when the Namibian SMS program was launched in 2009, "volunteers sent out over 1,000 unique health-related messages in one month. Peace Corps volunteers serving in other countries heard of the success and requested the program's model for their communities.

"This one innovative idea in Africa [where more than 3,000 volunteers, or 41 percent of the total Corps, serve] has spread to posts in Asia and South America in a matter of months," he said.

But he hastened to add that "technology alone is not a cure-all" for underdevelopment. "It needs to be partnered with brains, generosity and compassion. Alone it won't alleviate poverty, fight the spread of HIV/AIDS or increase access to education overnight, but it is an area where our volunteers' creativity and imagination is inspiring."

The Peace Corps was established in 1961 by President John F Kennedy. His call to service was echoed by President Obama, who recently presided over the largest budgetary expansion of the volunteer organization in its history. During almost 50 years, 200,000 Americans have served in the Peace Corps in 139 countries.

Williams, who was sworn in as the Peace Corps' 18th director in August 2009, is a former volunteer who served in the Dominican Republic from 1967 to 1970. He later joined the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), where he served for 22 years and ran the USAID mission in South Africa. He is the second African American and the fourth returned volunteer to head the agency.




# Peace Corps Promotes Health via Mobile Phone
March 23, 2010
Region: AF
Post: Namibia
project: Namibia - mHealth
excerpt: Namibia PCV uses mobile phones for health-care messages
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/article/2010/03/201003231649371ejrehsif0.908642.html#axzz3namheu00

**Washington** – The Peace Corps, the United States' premier overseas volunteer agency, is using mobile phones to reach, train and inform health care workers in Africa.

"A top priority for me as director of the Peace Corps is to create new ways to harness the innovation and creativity of our volunteers to further Peace Corps' impact and project sustainability," and that includes more mobile phone messaging, Aaron Williams told *America.gov*.

"Volunteers in the 21st century who come to the Peace Corps are technologically savvy with more [electronic] gear and knowledge than we could ever give them," Williams added. "We're running to catch up with them."

A case in point, he said, is health education software developed by two volunteers in Namibia — Rashid Khan and Jennifer Moore — using the mobile phone–based short messaging service (SMS), also known as text messaging, to communicate on issues such as HIV/AIDS and family planning.

Khan recently described how the program operates on a mobile technology Web site: "We are working in Namibia with three organizations using a modified version of PlaySMS we've dubbed HERSMS that implements a round-robin style of forwarding messages that aren't handled by keywords to a pool of volunteers who can then respond to the query and have it relayed back to the client." He added: "We use the system to create dialogues, support-line style, between volunteers and clients about sexual health topics. The software tracks keywords in the conversations and associates them with themes, which are then graphed."

Work on health and HIV/AIDS — a major focus for the 7,600 volunteers who have dedicated two years of their lives to living and working in 76 countries — represents 18 percent of all Peace Corps volunteer jobs.

In Namibia, where 1,150 volunteers have served since the country achieved independence in 1990, many of the 134 current volunteers use the SMS program while teaching information and communication technology (ICT) techniques in conjunction with other subjects such as English and mathematics. They also run community activities for their students, such as libraries and computer labs, boys' and girls' clubs, HIV/AIDS clubs, and computer classes for students, teachers and community members.

In education, which accounts for 33 percent of the Peace Corps' volunteers, ICT is also increasingly important as a tool to expand learning opportunities through the use of radio, video and computers, according to a Peace Corps document. ICT not only broadens access to education but "makes learning more interactive, provides teachers with access to classroom materials, and enables classrooms around the world to communicate and collaborate," it said.

Director Williams said in a recent speech that when the Namibian SMS program was launched in 2009, "volunteers sent out over 1,000 unique health-related messages in one month. Peace Corps volunteers serving in other countries heard of the success and requested the program's model for their communities.

"This one innovative idea in Africa [where more than 3,000 volunteers, or 41 percent of the total Corps, serve] has spread to posts in Asia and South America in a matter of months," he said.

But he hastened to add that "technology alone is not a cure-all" for underdevelopment. "It needs to be partnered with brains, generosity and compassion. Alone it won't alleviate poverty, fight the spread of HIV/AIDS or increase access to education overnight, but it is an area where our volunteers' creativity and imagination is inspiring."

The Peace Corps was established in 1961 by President John F Kennedy. His call to service was echoed by President Obama, who recently presided over the largest budgetary expansion of the volunteer organization in its history. During almost 50 years, 200,000 Americans have served in the Peace Corps in 139 countries.

Williams, who was sworn in as the Peace Corps' 18th director in August 2009, is a former volunteer who served in the Dominican Republic from 1967 to 1970. He later joined the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), where he served for 22 years and ran the USAID mission in South Africa. He is the second African American and the fourth returned volunteer to head the agency.



# High-tech help for Jamaican schools
June 16, 2007
By Rachel Tuinstra
Region: IAP
Post: Jamaica
excerpt: Eighth-graders from Bellevue’s Tyee Middle School are traveling to Jamaica next week to install computers at a poor public school.
Source: http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/high-tech-help-for-jamaican-school/

As a Peace Corps volunteer digging latrines in the West African nation of Mali, James Burke began thinking about computers and how they could help the world.

He decided that when he got home, he wanted to be a teacher.

And as a teacher, he wanted to find a way to help people in Third World countries through technology.

Fast-forward more than a decade, and Burke is an advanced computer-skills teacher at Tyee Middle School in Bellevue. Boxes of desktop computers and laptops sit at the front of his classroom, waiting to be packed into suitcases.

On Wednesday, Burke and 12 students will take the computers to Jamaica, where they will install the hardware in a poor public school in Negril.

The Sheffield All Ages School doesn’t have any computers, and the teachers there have little knowledge of how to use them, Burke said. Burke and his students will spend 12 days training them on the basics: how to turn a computer on, use a mouse, save a file, write in a Word document.

“My students know far more than the teachers there,” Burke said. “They’ll be helping to answer questions while I go through the training.”

Burke isn’t the only teacher who is working to share technology with the rest of the world. Other schools around the Eastside and Seattle have similar programs, including Seattle’s Garfield High School, which has been doing it the longest. In 10 years, the school’s Global Technology Academy has made 25 trips abroad to install computer labs in countries from the Philippines to Guatemala to Turkey.

“When we started doing this 10 years ago, people had never heard of a school doing this before,” said Kjell Rye, the academy’s president and a technology-education teacher at Garfield. “Before, people thought we were nuts. Now it’s like the jazz band; the program has become part of the fabric of the school.”

As a student teacher, Burke visited Rye’s class, and what he saw helped motivate him to press forward with his own plan. He spent the last four years getting his program up and running, establishing contacts and raising about $18,000 through grants.

The goal, Burke said, is twofold: for the Bellevue students to gain a broader world perspective, and to give the Sheffield students access to computers and skills they wouldn’t have otherwise. Burke hopes that the Sheffield girls especially will take advantage of the training, giving them a chance to move beyond employment as maids at hotels or resorts.

He plans a five-year commitment to keep the computer lab running, taking students to Jamaica each year.

The inaugural group includes 10 eighth-graders from Tyee, and two students from Newport High School who previously had Burke as a teacher.

“I took Mr. Burke’s class for two years, and I kept hearing him talk about this trip to Jamaica,” said Matt Eschbach, a 10th-grader at Newport High School. “I’m interested in the whole Peace Corps thing, and I want to know what it feels like to help people who are in need and give them something they don’t have.”

Most of the Sheffield students share desks, chairs and school supplies, and students here say they don’t really know what it will be like to meet kids their age who have never been around a computer.

“I don’t know how, but I believe this trip will change me,” said Will Kirby, an eighth-grader at Tyee. “I know it’ll be a good experience.”



# Baltimore Resident and Peace Corps Volunteer Builds Computer Lab in West Africa
December 1, 2009
Region: AF
Post: Togo
project: Togo - Computer Lab
excerpt: Togo computer lab development
Source: https://peacecorpssoutheast.com/2015/05/06/baltimore-resident-and-peace-corps-volunteer-builds-computer-lab-in-west-africa/

**Washington, D.C., May 6, 2015**– Peace Corps volunteer Amanda Walsh, of Baltimore, Md., is working with her community in Togo, West Africa to build a computer lab at a local middle school. A portion of the funds for the project were raised through the [Peace Corps Partnership Program (PCPP)](https://donate.peacecorps.gov/donate/), a program that helps support Peace Corps volunteer community projects worldwide.

"When I arrived in my community, it was instantly clear to me that the school lacked necessary resources and had no real way to access any new materials," said Walsh, a 2008 graduate of Loch Raven High School, in Towson, Md., who has been living and working in Togo since June 2013.

The computer lab installation includes five new computers as well as a printer and internet access. To ensure sustainability of the project, Walsh, along with a Togolese counterpart, will also instruct the school's staff on basic computer skills.

"If the teachers have access to the newest teaching techniques, information, and developments in their field, they will be more prepared to teach their students," said Walsh.

Walsh has worked closely with the school staff, including the Director, and all are eager to learn new computer skills. The school staff has already completed renovation on an existing space within the school to install the new computer lab.

In order to receive funding through the PCPP, Walsh's community made a 25 percent contribution to the total project cost and outlined success indicators for the computer lab. This helps ensure community ownership and a greater chance of long-term sustainability. One hundred percent of each tax-deductible PCPP donation went toward Walsh's project and the computer lab.

Walsh graduated in 2010 with a B.A. in French and International Relations from Gonzaga University in Spokane, Wash. and is currently a Peace Corps Master's International candidate at Gonzaga pursing a master's degree in TOESL. She is one of the 195 Maryland residents currently serving in the Peace Corps. More than 5,836 Maryland residents have served in the Peace Corps since 1961. Those interested in supporting projects like Walsh's in Togo can visit: [www.peacecorps.gov/donate](https://donate.peacecorps.gov/donate/).



# Peace Corps Volunteers Teach Thousands of Peruvians about Health and Environment through Radio Shows
August 26, 2011
Region: IAP
Post: Peru
project: Peru - Radio Shows
excerpt: Using broadcast radio to extend the reach of health programs in Peru.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/news/library/peace-corps-volunteers-teach-thousands-of-peruvians-about-health-and-environment-through-radio-shows/

**WASHINGTON, D.C., Aug. 26, 2011** — More than a dozen Peace Corps volunteers across Peru host weekly radio programs to provide information on health, current events and the environment to remote communities around the country. Volunteers often invite local community members and public officials to speak on topics ranging from HIV/AIDS prevention and care to healthy lifestyle tips and community service opportunities.

Peace Corps volunteers Jessica Smith of Iowa City, Iowa, and Nikki Eller of Seattle, Wash., host a weekly 45-minute radio show in western Peru which reaches more than 5,000 people. Since starting the show on *Radio Hispana* in February, Smith and Eller have hosted 17 shows covering heart health, HIV/AIDS awareness, emotional health, potable water, and the arts.

Our radio show is great. I get to talk about things that are important for people in my community to know, said Smith, a water and sanitation volunteer who arrived in Peru in September 2009. A listener told me she went to the hospital after learning more information about proper eye care from our show. It made me happy to know she was able to make an informed decision about her health because of our radio program.

Other volunteers in Peru who work in the areas of youth development, health and environmental awareness regularly speak on different radio programs throughout the country on health, current events, education and recycling.



# Peace Corps Volunteers in Armenia Use Text Messaging for HIVAIDS Education and Prevention
November 4, 2011
Region: EMA
Post: Armenia
project: Armenia - HIV/AIDS Education through SMS
excerpt: HIV/AIDS Education through SMS in Armenia
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20160101160855/http://www.peacecorps.gov/media/forpress/press/1894/

**Washington, D.C., November 4, 2011** — Peace Corps volunteers Lisa Conder of Englewood, Fla., and Ashley Ottewell of Belleville, Mich., spearheaded the launch of the SMS Information Hotline, a nationwide program in Armenia that promotes HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention through mobile-phone-based SMS text messaging.

The SMS Information Hotline provides potentially life-saving information that users may not be able to get otherwise, said Conder, who had the idea to start the Hotline in 2009 after learning about a similar Peace Corps project in Namibia. In Armenia, HIV/AIDS is sometimes referred to as a hidden epidemic. There is a general low awareness about HIV/AIDS and a lack of prevention programs and resources. People often avoid seeking testing, counseling, and treatment because of the stigma and social taboos associated with it.

Starting Oct. 21, 2011, community members have been able to send anonymous HIV/AIDS related questions through text messaging. They receive answers within 24 hours from Armenian Red Cross Society volunteers trained by the Armenia Ministry of Health’s National Center for AIDS Prevention. The Hotline is a resource accessible to the general public, including those in rural areas who might have limited access to accurate HIV/AIDS information.

Having a text messaging HIV/AIDS information hotline is a perfect way to make important information accessible and empower people to make healthy lifestyle choices, said Ottewell.

The creation, implementation, and a national information campaign on the SMS Information Hotline is funded through the U.S. Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) Volunteer Activities Support and Training (VAST) grant available to Peace Corps volunteers working in collaboration with local partners.

The SMS Information Hotline is implemented in cooperation with the Armenian Red Cross Society, Armenian mobile operators, the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Armenia, and Peace Corps staff and volunteers, including recently returned Peace Corps volunteers Nicholas Hutchings of Baltimore, Md., and Brent Hines of Belton, Texas.



# Peace Corps Volunteers Initiate Mobile Computer Training in Jordan
June 6, 2012
Region: EMA
Post: Jordan
project: Jordan - Computer Training
excerpt: Jordan mobile computer training
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/news/library/peace-corps-volunteers-initiate-mobile-computer-training-in-jordan/

**WASHINGTON, D.C., June 6, 2012** – Peace Corps volunteers Darius Bittle-Dockery of New Haven, Conn., and Jeanine Chiu of Oak Park, Calif., have developed a mobile internet station to train people in remote communities in Jordan basic computer and Internet skills.

More than 100 students and stay-at-home mothers have received two weeks of training each in basic computer navigation skills and word processing since the "mobile knowledge station" project was created a year ago.

"With more than 50 percent of the population of Jordan residing in the capital of Amman, there is a significant disparity between the connectedness throughout the different governorates," said Chiu, who has been working as an English teaching volunteer since October 2010.

The project is similar to traveling libraries, providing programming with a set of mobile equipment that moves according to the expressed need and on a set schedule between villages. This flexibility enables people in remote villages to access to training at a fraction of the cost.

"The mobile knowledge station is simple, yet versatile and can provide whatever programming is needed at any available time. The flexibility and cost makes it ideal for any center or organization that wants or needs training in a particular computer program or skill," said Bittle-Dockery, who has been living and working as a youth development volunteer in Jordan since October 2010.




# Keeping Peace Corps Volunteers Healthy, One Text at a Time
October 31, 2014
Source: https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/10/31/keeping-peace-corps-volunteers-healthy-one-text-time-0

Today, refilling your medicine cabinet with bandages and over the counter medicine from your local drugstore may seem like a trivial task, but for Peace Corps volunteers working in remote villages around the world, this task can be much more challenging. As we take steps to forge a 21st century Peace Corps, such as dramatically reducing the time it takes to complete a volunteer application from eight hours to less than one hour, we are also looking into ways to tap the ingenuity of volunteer developers to support our Peace Corps volunteers abroad.

One recent example of this was the development of Medlink, an SMS-based platform, allowing volunteers to text in requests for their medical kit refills to get supplies in a timely manner. An internal study showed that the overseas medical staff members spent up to eight hours a week responding to requests from Volunteers to resupply their medical kits that were being transmitted to medical units via emails, phone calls, and text messages. Peace Corps realized that a more efficient way to collect these requests and communicate with volunteers was needed. The health and safety of volunteers is our top priority, and we are always looking for new ways to improve internal processes.

At a recent convention in Atlanta, the Peace Corps' Director of Innovation met with several inspired developers to describe this global challenge. Excited, developers volunteered their time and skills to help improve the medical resupply process. The result is PC Medlink. As seen in the video, the application allows Volunteers to easily text in a request to refill supplies, allowing medical staff to focus on outreach, prevention, and treatment of volunteers, rather than administrative tasks.

This application followed many of the same steps outlined in the recently released [U.S. Digital Services Playbook](https://playbook.cio.gov/). We will continue to leverage open source, crowd-based solutions to better serve volunteers in the field.

We are excited that the developer community has shown support for and developed PC Medlink and we invite you make a difference by plugging into Peace Corps' mission on GitHub: [www.github.com/PeaceCorps](http://www.github.com/PeaceCorps).

*Carrie Hessler-Radelet is the Director of the Peace Corps and a Returned Peace Corps Volunteer, Western Samoa 1981-1983.*

*Brian Forde is the Senior Advisor for Mobile and Data Innovation, White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and a Returned Peace Corps Volunteer, Nicaragua 2003-2005.*

# Michigan Tech Adds New Peace Corps Master's International Programs in Computer Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering, GIS
November 20, 2014
Source: http://www.mtu.edu/news/stories/2014/november/michigan-tech-adds-new-peace-corps-masters-international-programs-computer-science-electrical-computer-engineering-gis.html

Michigan Technological University's award-winning Peace Corps Master's International (PCMI) program is offering new degree options for students in two departments: computer science and electrical and computer engineering (ECE). The School of Forest Resources and Environmental Science is also expanding its PCMI programs to include a Master of Geographic Information Science.

The expanded programs will enable more students to take part in PCMI, in which students earn a master's degree while simultaneously serving in the Peace Corps. Students typically take two semesters of courses on campus before volunteering for two years overseas and then returning to Michigan Tech to complete their degree.

"The new programs in computer science and ECE were pitched to the Peace Corps as an opportunity for our students to serve in math and science education or other sectors needing IT and technology expertise," said Kari Henquinet, PCMI director at Tech. "Our new PCMI students will bring technical training together with the strong interdisciplinary training that all of our Tech PCMI students have."

## Peace Corps at Michigan Tech

With the program's new offerings, students can now earn their master's through [ten different academic departments](http://www.mtu.edu/peacecorps) at Michigan Tech.

"All PCMI students take classes about cross-cultural learning and working with communities no matter which program they're in," says Henquinet. "We have 68 students currently involved in PCMI and hope to grow that number as we recruit for our new offerings."

Tim Ward, the first computer science PCMI student, says his experiences serving in the small island nation of Vanuatu have allowed him to use the STEM knowledge he gained through his undergraduate degree from Tech.

"This type of program lets you challenge yourself into overcoming obstacles that will make a first-world desk job seem like Easy Street once you get back," says Ward. "I joined the computer science PCMI program at Tech because I knew what a powerful combination it would be."

Since traveling overseas, Ward says his service projects have seen great success.

## Computer Science Comes to Vanuatu

"We implemented an $85,000 solar computer lab," he says. "We brought in funding and collaborators from seven different places. Without a volunteer, there would have been no hope of coordinating and funding anything like it. Peace Corps placed me in the crux of it all, allowing me to use my skills to better the lives of hundreds of students."

There is quite a bit of personalization and customization available through the program, says Associate Professor Jean Mayo, faculty coordinator for the computer science PCMI program.

"Master's students in computer science have the option to do thesis-, coursework-, or project-based studies to earn their degree," Mayo explains. "PCMI students in computer science take the project option and do work overseas to fulfill their requirements. Projects might be writing software that performs functions that current software doesn't and provides a benefit to the community they're serving in. Or, they could write software that allows an experiment to run using equipment that the community already has. It's very versatile."

Professor Leonard Bohmann, faculty coordinator for the ECE PCMI program, thinks the benefits his students can provide will be far-reaching.

## Electrical Power to the People

"ECE students would be well-versed in applying many technologies to help the communities in which they volunteer, " he says. "They might work on wireless technology projects or remote, stand-alone power systems, like photovoltaic or hydro-energy. One of the problems in many remote locations is access to power, especially for medical clinics. ECE students can help power them and keep medicines cold that need to be cold."

Mayo attributes PCMI's success at Tech to the type of students who attend the University.

"We attract students who are practically oriented," she says. "The kinds of students who can thrive in a difficult environment—the kinds who help others."

The Peace Corps couldn't be happier with the partnership.

"Michigan Tech has the most robust Peace Corps graduate program in the nation," says Brad Merryman, Peace Corps Midwest regional manager. "It's a remote school with a finger on the pulse of today's most pressing global issues, like women's education, food security, potable water, environmental conservation and natural disaster mitigation. These new programs offer new opportunities for students to pursue their personal and professional interests through Peace Corps and launch careers while they make a difference. We're thrilled that our partnership with Tech continues to expand."

*Michigan Technological University (www.mtu.edu) is a leading public research university developing new technologies and preparing students to create the future for a prosperous and sustainable world. Michigan Tech offers more than 120 undergraduate and graduate degree programs in engineering; forest resources; computing; technology; business; economics; natural, physical and environmental sciences; arts; humanities; and social sciences.*



# Mapping and the power of the crowd - Peace Corps' response to disaster in Vanuatu
April 3, 2015
By Courtney Clark
Region: IAP
Post: Vanuatu
project: Vanuatu - Mapping Disaster Response
excerpt: Disaster response in Vanuatu with the help of OpenStreetMap and the online community
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/mapping-and-the-power-of-the-crowd-peace-corps-response-to-disaster-in-vanuatu/

The map's invaluable data about the world's geography is completely crowd-sourced, meaning that anyone, anywhere can contribute their local knowledge or mapping skills -- and anyone, anywhere can use the data. OpenStreetMap truly is a map for and by "the people."

If we surveyed Peace Corps Volunteers today, most would confirm that a digital map of their host community does not exist. This lack of digital maps in developing countries creates logistical [nightmares](http://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/openstreetmap-volunteers-map-typhoon-haiyan-affected-areas-support-philippines-relief-and-recovery) when a crisis such as [Ebola](http://www.fastcolabs.com/3037350/elasticity/inside-the-crowdsourced-map-project-that-is-helping-contain-the-ebola-epidemic) or [Cyclone Pam](http://hot.openstreetmap.org/updates/2015-03-16*mapping*vanuatu*islands) strikes. [Since the 2010 Haiti earthquake](http://opensource.com/osm), developing country governments and aid organizations have relied on OpenStreetMap in times of crisis to help them navigate to affected areas, identify shelters, plan supply shipments and prepare for future natural disasters or epidemics. It takes time, however, to enter all that geographic data about the world's roads, buildings and natural features -- and that is where Peace Corps comes in.

Peace Corps' Office of Innovation has been hard at work training Peace Corps Volunteers, invitees, staff, Returned Peace Corps Volunteers, friends of Peace Corps and students in OpenStreetMap. These groups map countries affected by disaster but also more stable areas where current Peace Corps programs have requested a digital map for use in a [Volunteer project](http://tasks.hotosm.org/?sort*by=priority&direction=asc&search=peace+corps). It is okay that many contributors have never been to the countries they map. Thanks to OpenStreetMap's high-quality satellite imagery, mappers can use a simple web tool to trace over imagery of buildings and roads.

On March 23, Returned Peace Corps Volunteers of Washington (RPCV/W) and the Office of Innovation hosted a [two-hour mapping event](http://www.peacecorpsconnect.org/2015/03/peace-corps-mappers-create-maps-for-cyclone-disaster-relief/) to respond to disaster caused by Cyclone Pam in Vanuatu and the South Pacific. Forty-Seven Peace Corps Volunteers, Trainees, Returned PCVs, staff and friends of Peace Corps mapped the entire nations of Tuvalu and Kiribati and made substantial contributions to a digital map of Vanuatu. RPCVs who served in Vanuatu shared their experiences as Volunteers and post-disaster updates that meant more than any news article could. They also joined current Vanuatu Volunteers and Trainees, who connected via Google Hangout, in adding their local knowledge of Vanuatu to the map by identifying schools and other potential shelters and communication towers.

Americans typically support Volunteers in the field and Peace Corps countries through donations to grant funds or disaster relief funds. Donations remain a critically important resource, but OpenStreetMap opens up an entirely new way for Americans to play a direct role in both Peace Corps projects and disaster relief efforts. We hope that you'll join us in mapping the world by learning how to map with the [State Department's excellent tutorials](http://www.mapgive.state.gov/) and contributing to [Peace Corps mapping projects](http://tasks.hotosm.org/?sort*by=priority&direction=asc&search=peace+corps).



# International Women's Day Mapathon: Making Maps by and For Women
March 18, 2016
By Paige Norman
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/international-womens-day-mapathon-making-maps-by-and-for-women/

Can you imagine a Google Map that doesn't show a drug store where you can buy family planning materials or feminine hygiene products?

What if your GPS didn't show the local hair salons or kindergartens? In some maps, the elements that largely affect women are not recognized, while other venues such as strip clubs, bars and brothels are over-represented. Maps can be biased by the creator, leaving out critical parts of the community infrastructure.

On March 8, 2016, the Red Cross and the Peace Corps partnered to host an International Women's Day mapathon to discuss and improve the representation and participation of women and girls in OpenStreetMap, working with the 2016 theme #PledgeforParity.

Before the mapping began, Alyssa Wright presented on the current status of women in technology, mapping and the open source community. She shocked the room with the statistic that only 3 percent of the OpenStreetMap contributors were women. As her slides showed, mapping should be a journey that leads to a representation of the community. If women aren't on the map, where are they in the community?

Katie McSheffrey from the Peace Corps Let Girls Learn program presented a different kind of mapping initiative that has Volunteers "plotting" girls in a community. The one-year-old [Let Girls Learn](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/) initiative, specifically the Girl Roster, does this by asking simple questions to girls, such as her age, education status, marital status and who she lives with. By doing this, community leaders learn how many girls aren't going to school and why, building a resource that can create solutions to get all of those girls back in school. Additionally, it makes girls visible in the community when they are not represented on a map.

At this mapathon, we intended to make women visible on and off the map.

The task for the night was a malaria-prone region in Mozambique. The high percentage of women affected by the parasite highlights other critical areas of inequity such as lack of access, limited mobility, larger workload and attendance of family needs above their own. This specific location was chosen because the 2,293 buildings and 430 kilometers of roads edited over the night will soon be used by Peace Corps Volunteers and their counterparts to collect data on malaria prevention programs like bed net distribution and indoor residual spraying. Volunteers across the country will also be training women and girls in their community how to map, giving them access to education, technology and a voice that they will pass on. A never-ending cycle of mapping!

Though there were many edits made at this event, there is still more to do! Make mapping your #PledgeforParity by joining the mapping revolution. Visit OpenStreetMap to make an account and get started helping Peace Corps with this [task](http://bit.ly/map4pc), or sign up for [email](http://bit.ly/220wT25) updates.



===== Worldview Magazine =====

[The Worldview magazines are available as PDF images]

Worldview Magazine is the National Peace Corps Association's (NPCA) quarterly publication that highlights Volunteer and Returned Volunteer stories, ideas, criticisms, and accomplishments.

It is a high-quality publication that reaches many readers—and the volume and quality of the stories of ICT over the years serves as another indication of the importance of strong and committed ICT perspectives and support.



===== Partners =====

Successful Peace Corps Volunteers never work in a vacuum. The best projects are those done side-by-side with communities, counterparts, stakeholders, organizations, governments, and entrepreneurs.

These stories highlight the critical role that so many partners play in supporting the work of Volunteers during their service, but also critically in providing the resources necessary to make projects successful and sustainable.



# Peace Corps-AOL Time Warner Peace Packs Program
December 1, 2001
Source: https://www.scribd.com/document/53420516/peace-corps-peace-packs-aol-time-warner-foundation

In 2000, the Director of Peace Corps announced an Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Initiative and called upon U.S. high-tech corporations to help Peace Corps extend the reach of information technology to their Volunteers and the rural communities in which they live. The idea was to build information and communications technology capacity in underdeveloped communities so they could benefit from the knowledge-sharing capabilities of information technology. The Peace Packs program was borne out of this e-Initiative with the objective to explore models of how information technology could be used in developing communities to meet local health, economic, education, and civic goals. The Peace Packs program awards cash grants to Peace Corps Volunteers who have proposed innovative ways to use information technology to improve the communities in which they serve. The Peace Packs program is intended to:

- Expand the reach of development and ICT efforts into remote areas through the work of Volunteers.
- Integrate ICT into current Peace Corps projects.
- Spur innovation at the grassroots level.

## Who are Peace Corps’ partners in this e-Initiative?

America Online (AOL), now AOLTime Warner, partnered with Peace Corps in October 2000, pledging $1 million over two years to Peace Corps’ e-Initiative through its philanthropic AOL Time Warner Foundation. AOL Time Warner is a U.S. media and entertainment company, whose businesses include interactive and e-services, cable systems, filmed entertainment, television networks, music, and publishing. The AOL Time Warner Foundation is a nonprofit organization that seeks ways to use online technology to improve lives.

## What does the partnership hope to achieve?

Through “Peace Packs” grants provided by AOL, Peace Corps Volunteers in remote areas in countries such as Ghana (see photo, below) obtain basic computer equipment and services to advance health, education, small business, and other development priorities in their communities. According to Peace Corps Director Gaddi H. Vasquez: “This generous grant from the AOL Time Warner Foundation will have a major impact during the next several years as increasing numbers of teachers, students, and community members are trained using this new equipment and new information technologies. Already, we are encouraged by the results we have seen from this program.”

## What are the responsibilities of the partners?

Peace Corps administers and manages the Peace Packs program, provides guidance on implementing proposal activities, and monitors reporting processes. Peace Corps Volunteers work with community groups, cooperatives, schools, and nongovernmental organizations in-country to develop proposals that integrate information technology into local health, education, micro-enterprise, and other community development projects. Since all computer equipment purchased under the Peace Packs program becomes community property, community members must include a plan for how their Peace Pack activity will be self-sustaining long after their Peace Corps Volunteers have left.

The AOL grant enables Peace Corps Volunteers and their community partners to locally purchase the information technology devices needed for their proposed projects. A typical Peace Pack costs about $8,000 and consists of three computers with modems; a printer, digital camera, or other computer peripherals; and up to two years of Internet connectivity in some areas. The $1 million endorsed by AOL for the Peace Packs program has been matched to date by nearly $972,000 from grant-recipient community organizations and third-party donors in the form of cash, labor, equipment, supplies, and facilities.

Grant recipients try to ensure the financial sustainability of their operations and continued use of technology. A school in Ghana, for example, plans to rent its Peace Packs computer facilities to neighboring schools and community groups. Other groups propose to institute small fees for use of systems and software, and for classes in computer use.
How are the Peace Packs program communities chosen?

Volunteers send completed Peace Packs proposals for their communities to Peace Corps headquarters in Washington, where they undergo competitive rounds of project assessments and reviews. Up to 60 project proposals are considered each year for funding consideration under the Peace Packs program. Proposals are judged by their potential to advance development goals, achieve sustainability, and engage the local community in which the Peace Pack would be administered.

Once a project has been approved, the Peace Corps Chief Administrative Officer for the Center for Field Assistance and Applied Research transfers funding authority to posts. Checks are then issued to community groups or the appropriate vendors to purchase needed equipment and supplies. Peace Pack coordinators at post report the progress of project activities – like this computer lab in Kazakhstan – to the program management team in Washington.

## How are Foundation monies accounted for at Peace Corps?

Peace Packs coordinators direct financial reporting procedures at Peace Corps offices overseas and report to the program management team in Washington. Peace Corps then prepares an annual report for the AOL Time Warner Foundation. The report explains how the funds are spent, reviews the progress being made toward accomplishing the proposal’s goals, and evaluates the overall effectiveness of the Peace Packs project.

## Who oversees the technical logistics of the program?

Peace Corps provides most of the technical support to the program. In the fall of 2002, Peace Corps published two training manuals – the ICT Training Facilitator’s Guide and Reference Manual and the ICT Training Participant Handbook – to assist Volunteers in transferring technology skills to their local communities. Peace Corps’ new IT Specialists, hired at each post following migration from the Mac to PC platform, are often called upon to assist Peace Pack recipients with technical, logistical, or service related concerns, in addition to their regular duties. Additionally, computer skills training workshops for Volunteers were held at 40 Peace Corps offices overseas. Workshops covered everything from hardware/software troubleshooting to utilizing Internet resources for teaching English to innovative technologies for environmental projects.

AOL Time Warner Foundation also provides some support; it established an online meeting group for Peace Packs recipients to communicate electronically with AOL employees who are returned Peace Corps Volunteers. The online group is a means through which best practices and challenges to utilizing information technology in developing communities can be shared and addressed in a mutually supportive way. Peace Pack recipients may also benefit from online technical support from AOL employees.

## What were the outcomes of the partnership?

Since the inception of the Peace Corps/AOL partnership, over 340 Peace Packs proposals have been received and processed. Of that total, 129 proposals in 45 different countries were recommended for funding. Examples of approved projects include setting up epidemiology databases, connecting women’s craft cooperatives with electronic- commerce markets, and monitoring vaccine delivery programs. Volunteers also use the Peace Packs program to teach computer skills and to exchange advice or ideas with other Peace Corps e-communities.

In 2001, Peace Packs grants were issued to Peace Corp Volunteers and 24 community groups in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Honduras, Belize, Haiti, the eastern Caribbean, Paraguay, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Moldova, Romania, Uzbekistan, Jordan, and Tonga. The Peace Corps Center for Field Assistance and Applied Research reported that by the end of the year over 50,000 members of local communities around the world benefited from improved access to information technology.

Peace Corps projected that at the end of 2002, the Peace Packs program would have benefited more than 200,000 host country citizens. At present, there are 75 ICT-trained Peace Corps Volunteers worldwide. Peace Corps headquarters has received requests from posts for 103 ICT Volunteers for 2003.

The partnership with the AOL Time Warner Foundation proved invaluable to Peace Corps objectives to improve development efforts in poor communities and to bridge the digital divide. Peace Packs have been used to conduct research to improve agricultural productivity in Belize, to teach computer literacy to students and adults in Jordan, and to provide access to health information in the national language to youth in Romania.

## What challenges did Peace Corps and the AOL Time Warner Foundation encounter during their partnership?

Balancing the corporate vision of the AOL Time Warner Foundation with developing country limitations necessitated a shifting of program priorities in 2002. The Foundation wanted the maximum amount of Peace Packs communities to gain access to the Internet as quickly as possible. But, limited telecommunications infrastructure in many developing countries, coupled with the rural site placements of most Peace Corps Volunteers, made such a goal difficult to achieve.

Other problems encountered were mainly logistical. Most groups reported delays in receiving funding or equipment delivery. The remoteness of many Peace Corps posts made Internet connection a trying and costly task. In some countries, faulty hardware and computer viruses presented additional challenges to Volunteers.

## How did they resolve problems?

Peace Corps worked with the Foundation to ensure that the needs and expectations of the partners were met. Eligibility requirements for applying to the program were modified so that Peace Packs grants were awarded to those communities that could demonstrate an ability to connect to the Internet within three months of receiving the funding. As a result, the percentage of Peace Pack communities connected to the Internet nearly doubled and the focus of the Peace Packs program shifted to better value the ability to communicate and collaborate with a global community.

## Will this program continue in the future?

The close of 2002 marked the end of the AOL Time Warner Foundation $1 million grant that serviced the Peace Packs program. Peace Corps is currently discussing the possible continuation of the program with the AOL Time Warner Foundation.

The Peace Packs program is expected to have a favorable cumulative effect in the near future as increasing numbers of Volunteers, host country community groups, nongovernmental organizations, and youth increase their knowledge of and skill in ICT use. Peace Corps plans to improve the program with the counsel of the AOL Time Warner Foundation by incorporating key lessons learned from past experiences into ongoing program development. Utilizing ICT for development efforts, and expanding the reach of those efforts into remote areas, remains a primary objective, as does encouraging sustainability of ICT use through education and training.



# Peace Corps Honduras Receives Donation from Teachers Without Borders
December 11, 2003
Region: IAP
Post: Honduras
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20081017175840/http://www.peacecorps.gov/index.cfm?shell=resources.media.press.view&news*id=893

**WASHINGTON, D.C.** – Christmas came early this year for Peace Corps volunteers in Honduras who received 352 computers, equipment and software for schools, libraries and other educational facilities in their communities. The in-kind donation from Teachers Without Borders, totaling $54,825, was geared to increase the scope of computer usage throughout communities and schools in Honduras.

A total of 35 schools, libraries, and other educational facilities in the 25 Honduran communities where Peace Corps volunteers work will benefit from this donation. The Teachers Without Borders organization received the computers from the Montgomery County Public School District in Rockville, Maryland, and then donated the equipment to the Peace Corps through the Peace Corps’ Office of Private Sector Initiatives.

“Peace Corps Honduras greatly appreciates this extremely generous donation and all of the work that has gone into making it a reality. Peace Corps volunteers and staff are scheduling a series of workshops for these entities to ensure that the communities have the technical knowledge and abilities to receive these computers and put them to good use,” stated Jeff Cohen, the Program Training Officer in Honduras.

The donation grew out one volunteer’s initial computer request for a Peace Corps Partnership sponsored library. The span of this tremendous donation will now not only benefit the one volunteer’s community, but also equip the community’s surrounding areas. Teachers Without Borders also provided the money needed to fund the shipping costs.

Fred Mednick, founder of Teachers Without Borders said, “It is an honor for Teachers Without Borders to work with the Peace Corps to help close the educational divide in Honduras.”

The Peace Corps Partnership Program accepts donations for Peace Corps volunteer projects worldwide. All projects are community-initiated and include a 25 percent community contribution. The Peace Corps projects receive 100 percent of any donations. A list of Peace Corps projects in need of funding can be found on the Peace Corps Web site at [www.peacecorps.gov/contribute](http://www.peacecorps.gov/contribute), on the volunteer projects link. If you are interested in donating, you may reach the Office of Private Sector Initiatives at 1-800-424-8580, ext. 2170, or via e-mail at pcpp@peacecorps.gov.

Since 1961, more than 170,000 volunteers have served in the Peace Corps, working in such diverse fields as education, health, HIV/AIDS education and awareness, information technology, business development, the environment, and agriculture. Peace Corps Volunteers must be U.S. citizens and at least 18 years of age. Peace Corps service is a two-year commitment



# Software Donation to Aid Volunteer Projects
July 2, 2004
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20041026120441/http://www.peacecorps.gov/index.cfm?shell=resources.media.press.view&news*id=959

**WASHINGTON, D.C., July 2, 2004** – Peace Corps volunteers working in the field of information technology, and the communities they serve, will soon benefit from a generous software donation.

The Academy for Educational Development (AED) recently donated 2,000 copies of Sun Microsystems’ Star Office 6.0 software that will be distributed in 62 countries. The software, which is valued at over $159,000, contains word processing, spreadsheet, presentation, graphics, and database programs. With this software, Peace Corps volunteers will have a new resource to train host country community members on basic computer skills, giving communities the computer skills they need to manage businesses and information.

“I would like to thank the Academy for Educational Development for the opportunity to take these tools into the field and make the world a better place,” said Peace Corps Director Gaddi H. Vasquez. Director Vasquez also thanked AED on behalf of the citizens of the host countries who, he hopes, will “derive enormous benefit from this software.”

The donation was made possible through collaboration between the Peace Corps’ Office of Private Sector Initiatives (OPSI), the Peace Corps’ Center for Field Assistance and Applied Research, and AED’s Global Learning Portal.

AED’s Global Learning Portal works to connect teachers across the globe by giving them the training and resources they need to more effectively teach and do their jobs. AED, which boasts 70 returned Peace Corps volunteers on their staff, is a nonprofit social change organization that seeks new ways to improve the quality of education across the world, including in Peace Corps programs. In addition to education, AED works in all the major areas of development of interest to the Peace Corps, including health and HIV/AIDS prevention, information technology, and the environment.

OPSI’s mission is to build enduring financial alliances with the private sector and to connect donors with community-based projects where volunteers serve. One hundred percent of the donations to OPSI are directly allocated to Peace Corps projects selected by the donors.

If you are interested in learning more about the Peace Corps’ volunteer projects and how you may contribute, please contact Peace Corps' Office of Private Sector Initiatives toll-free at 1.800.424.8580, ext. 2170, or via e-mail at pcpp@peacecorps.gov. For more information on OPSI, please click here.

Since 1961, more than 171,000 volunteers have served in the Peace Corps, working in such diverse fields as education, health, HIV/AIDS education and prevention, information technology, business development, the environment, and agriculture. Peace Corps volunteers must be U.S. citizens and at least 18 years of age. Peace Corps service is a two-year commitment.



# Shipment to Peace Corps in Senegal World Computer Exchange
January 19, 2010
Region: AF
Post: Senegal
project: Senegal - Computer Donations
excerpt: Senegal computer donation update
Source: http://www.worldcomputerexchange.org/node/108

*World Computer Exchange has shipped computers to Peace Corps volunteers in Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Malawi, Moldova, Philippines, Senegal and Tanzania. This is just one of the many stories of how Peace Corps volunteers have helped connect WCE.*

Watch the [YouTube video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zlXc6rFufe4) by one of the Peace Corps volunteers about this project Senegal.

191 computers for schools in Senegal were shipped from WCE Chicago in October 2009 to help connect 10,436 youth in 17** **schools and youth centers assisted by 9 Peace Corps** **Volunteers that were delivered by the [Peace Corps country office](http://www.pcsenegal.org/). For this shipment, the Ambassador of the USA to Senegal was the consignee.

The Peace Corps country director, Christopher Hedrick arranged for safe space for the sorting of the computers into the amounts for each school and arranged for the delivery of the computers to each site as Peace Corps cars are making their regular rounds.

WCE works through a network of 570 vetted Partners in 71 developing countries. Partners in each country are assisted by one or two or our 230 volunteer Program Officers. Our lead Program Officer for Senegal is Lettie Heer of Louisville, Kentucky, USA was a Peace Corps Volunteer in Senegal from 2002 to 2004. She spends part of each year in Senegal. During her last visit, she met with representatives of the Peace Corps country office and some Peace Corps Volunteers to discuss for the shipment that previously arrived and plan for a next shipment. This past shipment was a change in the way that WCE usually works with Peace Corps. When WCE has worked with Peace Corps in many other countries, there has only been one prior shipment (El Salvador) where the Peace Corps country office, headed by Mike Wise, acted as the consignee handling the details of the container's arrival from the port. WCE has made 20 shipments of computers to schools assisted by Peace Corps Volunteers in: Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Malawi, Moldova, Philippines, Senegal and Tanzania.

In Senegal, nine Peace Corps Volunteers found that the 16 schools that they assist were interested in receiving working used Pentium 3 and Pentium 4 computers. They gathered funds from their communities and then also encouraged their friends and families to make tax-deductible donations to WCE. One of the PCVs recently posted the following: [http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?topic=7306&uid=2224131220](http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?topic=7306&uid=222413122)

For this past shipment, Lettie led other WCE volunteers in the Sponsor Campaign to raise inside of the USA, 1/3 of the funds needed to cover the WCE sourcing and shipping costs. Volunteers from the WCE Baltimore/Washington Chapter assisted her in raising $5,014. When WCE ran a "Friends and Family" online fund raiser in June 2009, eight of the 50 donors gave to support this shipment and their donations were generously matched by an anonymous donor. A big assist came from a team of volunteer from Booz Allen Hamilton who helped hold a fund raiser in a restaurant in Morgan Adams part of Washington DC - that also donated to this Sponsor Campaign.

In her recent annual visit to Senegal in February of 2010, Lettie again met with Peace Corps representatives to begin to plan for WCE's third shared and Sponsored container of 200 computers to help connect more rural schools in Senegal.

A Peace Corps Volunteer about to receive 23 computers from this shipment for the schools she is assisting said "The opportunity to offer 2,000 children computer and Internet training is incredible, and I genuinely think it will offer them a better future. I can't really say in words how wonderful it would be for them to have this opportunity. Senegal is a poorly educated country; students who are still in school at the middle and high school level are committed to receiving an education. In today's world, that requires computers."




# Computers Distributed to Peace Corps Volunteers in Honduras
September 2, 2011
Region: IAP
Post: Honduras
project: Honduras - Computer Donations
excerpt: Honduras computer donation update
Source: http://www.worldcomputerexchange.org/computers-distributed-peace-corps-volunteers-honduras

Six Peace Corps Volunteers in various parts of Honduras are helping local schools in the communities where they are based become oriented to the shipment of 200 used Pentium 3 (and some P4) computers to World Vision from World Computer Exchange with $6,284 raised from Rotary Clubs and individuals in the USA.;

The six Peace Corps Volunteers arranged for World Vision to be the consignee receiving this shipment and seeing that it gets to the 22 schools and communities that have provided part of the financial donations. The communities: Mercedes, Las Vegas, Barracito, Banderias, Chaguites, Miraflores, El Coral, Plan de Rosario, San Antonio, El Tular, Limoncito, Cruz Alta, San Jose Jocatán, Laguna Seca, Yuscaran, La Lima, El Playon, Planes de Playon, Pashapa, Yaruconte, and San Juan.

This was WCE's first shipment to Honduras ~ our 41st country! This was WCE's 122nd shipment.

The Chatham Rotary Club in Massachusetts and the Clayton Rotary Club in Missouri each donated funds toward this shipment.

18 of the 200 computers in this shipment went to the youth school in a prison in Danli run by Hope Fellowship Ministries of Mountain Movers Missions International.

Bob Klepper is the WCE Program Officer for Honduras. He helped to get this shipment organized and led the fund raising for the $6,284 from financial Sponsors toward the sourcing and shipping costs.

SPONSORS: Lynda Bowen, Sandra Bukowski, Michael Cestroni, Chatham Massachusetts Rotary Club, Alexander & Maya Cherney, Clayton Missouri Rotary Club, Pamela Cooney & Timothy Anderson, Monica Eargle, Edward Gow, Laurie Hannon, Marilynn Holman, Christopher Juergens, Bob Klepper, Ann & Don Kornblet, Marilyn LaCasse, Peter McBride, Kirsten McClain, Marlyn Meredith, Bronwen Morgan, Ben Senturia, Arden-Marie Silvers, Susan Smolen, Brian Terkelsen, and Larry & Jean Wickline.

After this shipment arrives, WCE will schedule another container and a visit by one of our eCorps tech teams. We are currently seeking a company to help with part of the costs for this visit. We are also planning a project to identify appropriate electronic recycling in Honduras and increase public awareness in Honduras of the need to recycle appropriately.

WCE has shipped computers to schools assisted by Peace Corps Volunteers in: Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Malawi, Moldova, Philippines, Senegal, Tanzania.




# Peace Corps Volunteer Uses InterConnection Laptops in Mozambique
July 16, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Mozambique
project: Mozambique - Computer Donations
excerpt: Laptop donations in Mozambique
Source: http://interconnection.org/news/peace-corps-volunteer-uses-interconnection-laptops-in-mozambique

Peace Corps volunteer Drew Capone recently received laptops from InterConnection for his high school students at a school in Mabalane, Mozambique. Previously the school only had two very old desktop computers. Drew a member of the Peace Corps since December, is teaching Chemistry and Information Technology to 10th, 11th and 12th graders. Prior to joining the [Peace Corps](http://www.peacecorps.gov/) Drew was an engineer in Hoboken, New Jersey. Drew generously used some of his personal savings to purchase the deeply discounted laptops for his school. To help minimize costs even more one of InterConnection's board members was kind enough to bring the laptops with him, while on a trip to Mozambique to work with [VillageReach](http://www.villagereach.org/).

We recently wrote Drew to see how things were going in Mozambique.

## How are the computers being used?

I currently give lessons to the 10th, 11th, and 12th graders interested in learning about computers. Many of my students have never used a computer before, so we are starting with the absolute fundamentals. Using typing games, my students are learning proper typing skills utilizing two hands, and we use some fun games such as "Cut the Rope" and "Angry Birds" to practice using a mouse. Eventually, I am going to move into Microsoft Office Basics. I have also been using the computers to assist with automation of school processes using Microsoft Excel. Currently, the school administration does most of its grades by hand. I am working with the Assistant Director to implement easy to use excel tables to automate this process.

After my service I will pass the laptops along to the volunteer who replaces me to continue using to teach computers in Mabalane.

## How many students are at the school? How many students use the computers per day / week?

There are about 600 students at the school. I have 10-20 students physically using the laptops each day, and 50 unique students who are interacting with the laptops every week.

## Have you seen any immediate impact or benefits from people using the computers?

The energy in the town has been on and off for the last 48 hours, so the school's two desktops have been unusable. This is common about one day every week. I can charge the [laptops](http://interconnection.org/nonprofit/refurbished-laptops.html) during the night in my house, and the students still have computers to use during my classes, whereas before we only had my personal laptop to use.

Also, for the students who I have a lot of trust in, I let them borrow a laptop to use in the school library. Most of the students will never be able to afford a laptop, so there is something to be said about the encouragement and self-esteem boost a student receives when a teacher trusts them with such an expensive piece of technology.

Furthermore, the entire educational system of Mozambique caters to information retention for Provincial and Country Exams. Most lessons from my colleagues consist of wrote dictation, and applying learned concepts through practice is extremely rare. Therefore, allowing the students to play games to learn how to use a computer is a great tool to develop their problem-solving skills.

## Do you have any feedback on the laptops? Did they work well?

The [laptops](http://interconnection.org/nonprofit/refurbished-laptops.html) are phenomenal. My students and colleagues are extremely impressed with them, and they can't believe how cheap they were for the exceptional quality. Excluding my personal laptop, they are probably the nicest laptops in my entire District.

I was personally impressed that the battery life is still great (4 hours on power saver mode).



# IBM and Peace Corps partner with Ashesi in Let Girls Learn Initiative
March 14, 2016
Region: AF
Post: Ghana
Source: http://www.ashesi.edu.gh/stories-and-events/2154-ibm-and-peace-corps-partner-with-ashesi-in-let-girls-learn-initiaitve.html

The [Corporate Service Corps (CSC)](http://www.ibm.com/ibm/responsibility/corporateservicecorps/) team from [IBM](http://www.ibm.com/us-en/) in partnership with the [Peace Corps](http://ghana.peacecorps.gov/) visited Ashesi to lead a workshop on women empowerment under the [Let Girls Learn](https://letgirlslearn.gov/) initiative. Other partners included [Pyxera Global](http://pyxeraglobal.org/welcome/), [Techaide](http://www.techaide.net/) and the Ministry of Gender and Social Protection.

According to the Let Girls Learn initiative, 62 million girls around the world are not in school, and the chance to get into school becomes harder as they get older. Started by Michelle Obama, the First Lady of the United States, the initiative is to help expand access to education for girls and remove barriers that make it impossible for them to attend school. This workshop at Ashesi marked the first [collaboration](http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/48199.wss) between IBM and Peace Corps in support of Let Girls Learn.

Girls from various junior and senior high schools attended the workshop alongside students from Ashesi who acted as co-facilitators. In her opening address, Angelina Kyeremanten-Jimoh, Country Manager of IBM, shared her growth and journey to becoming a top executive at IBM, encouraging the girls to be confident as women and to work hard and excel in school.

"We are here to celebrate women, to celebrate the young girls and to empower them to be bigger than they ever thought they can be," she said. "Being a woman is not an impediment. If you take advantage of being a woman, you will excel. We should encourage our young women of today that they can aspire to be what they want to be."

The workshop included a series of presentations interspersed with speed mentoring sessions with IBM executives and Peace Corps volunteers, for the girls and Ashesi students in attendance. These exercises were aimed at exposing the girls to a variety of career options and paths, and also provide them with leadership towards their careers.

"This is in celebration of young girls to aspire them to be bigger than they want to be," said Gina Tesla, Director of Corporate Citizenship Initiative at IBM. "What we ultimately want to achieve with the girls is to raise more value; and also see how that can be extended and sustained after we leave."

The workshop also provided an opportunity for networking and interaction between the IBM executives and the Ashesi community. For students at Ashesi, they were able to gain firsthand exposure into career experiences at a leading technology firm.

"We're moving into an era where through research, big data analytics and more, we gain insights to life around us," said Business Administration Lecturer at Dr. Esi Ansah, who facilitated the workshop. "It was important to plug into that world through this program and the close exchanges with the IBM execs. It was also to give students the exposure to career models and professionals in the business and technology circles."




# IBM links arms with Peace Corps to ‘inject’ tech in IRRI, Searca
July 23, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Philippines
project: Philippines - IBM Partnership
excerpt: The idea for the Girls of Tomorrow Program was born while waiting on a taxi one early September morning.
Source: http://newsbytes.ph/2016/07/23/ibm-links-arms-with-peace-corps-to-inject-tech-in-irri-searca/

**LOS BANOS, Laguna** — A recently minted partnership between the US Peace Corps and technology behemoth IBM is providing a shot in the arm for the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI).

The Peace Corps and IBM had recently formed a public-private partnership, through the Peace Corps Response (PCR) program and IBM Corporate Service Corps (CSC), which was launched recently in the Philippines.

The collaboration gives IBM's highly skilled corporate professionals the opportunity to serve in foreign countries in short-term, high-impact pro bono consulting assignments.

The Philippines is the second country to benefit from the partnership, with the PCR for IRRI and Southeast Asian Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture (Searca) commencing in December 2015.

Peace Corps director Carrie Hessler-Radelet said the tie-up brings together IBM's multinational reach with Peace Corp's grassroots network.

"Peace Corps and IBM share a common dedication to problem-solving in a way that makes a measurable impact in the world, whether it is re-inventing information and revolutionizing technology or helping communities address pressing needs at the last mile of development," she added.

Dr. Gil C. Saguiguit Jr., director and head of Searca, said the project marks the first time they are hosting a team from IBM. "Already, we are impressed by the credentials of the group who will do their 'Peace Corps'-type of work here," he said.

Meanwhile, the "injection" of technology to IRRI comes in the form of an innovation-driven project to push the world's premier rice organization deeper into the digital era by digitizing its library and science academy, among others.

The rice research outfit is expected to benefit from the knowledge and technology recently contributed by the IBM Corporate Service Corps (CSC) in the Philippines –15 IBMers from 10 countries who wrapped up their stint at the sprawling IRRI compound in this town.

The 15 members of the IBM CSC came from the US, Brazil, South Africa, Slovakia, Italy, Spain, Mexico, the Netherlands, and India.

Grouped into five teams, the IBMers presented their recommendations to IRRI during the program's closing ceremonies on Thursday, July 21.

David Raper, who leads IBM's Corporate Citizenship for the Asia Pacific and Greater China, said working with two international organizations — IRRI and Searca – was a source of pride for the volunteers.

"We really appreciate the value of being able to work on difficult programs. And when a difficult program like this will help many people, I think IBMers are proud that they and the company can contribute to that," he said.

Raper added: "IBM sees this corporate service co-program with three types of benefits: benefit to the partners we work with; benefit to IBMers to grow and develop their career; and benefit to IBM who, through this partnership, has been able to learn about new issues, learn about problem-solving in different way and understands the Philippines better, which is also important to us as a business."

IBM employee Melody Balcet, also a Peace Corps volunteer recently inducted by US Ambassador Philip Goldberg at the Peace Corps' Manila Office, served as a specialist for institutional strengthening to help build the capacity of IRRI's voluminous research information assets by digitization, big data analytics, cloud computing, and other information technology (IT) strategies.

The project is on its last two weeks, but Balcet will stay on to complete a three-month period, this time wearing her hat as a Peace Corps member.

Aside from Balcet, other members of IBM's service corps are Richard Chang, Michelle Kennedy, Prashant Negi, Kirsten Haver Droeze, Ayrton Gomes Ribeiro, Alisson Decio Fernandes, Marian Schwarz, Jacqueline Liston Velasco, Dinaz Taylor, Roberto Raffo, Diana Dierks, Pedro Gutierres de Cos Herrero, Adrian Mitchell, and Melissa Greco.

Andrea Escalona, CSC program manager for IBM Asia Pacific and Greater China Group, said they chose the town of Los Banos for the project's site "because we have some experience with agriculture and research kind of location."

She said the project for IRRI and Searca has a four-week timeline of completion, while its Peace Corps component is three months. The recommendations for each of the project's components it is now up to IRRI and Searca to implement.

For the IRRI Library, the rice institution seeks to transition from a "brick-and-mortar" library of resources into a virtual, fully digitized, network-based library.

On Big Data, IRRI has now in its position a hardware capable of storing data up to 200 terabyte (TB). The agency's Web and Enhanced Country Dossiers, on the other hand, aims to create a single consolidated "one-stop-shop" for country briefs, requiring only little manual tasks.

For the Science Academy, the vision of IRRI is to transition it from training center (TC) into a world-class Rice Science Academy (RSA).

Meanwhile, Searca's Knowledge Management seeks to scale up business practices and strategies both internally and externally by, among others, extending social media reach.

IBM Philippines president and country general manager Luis Pineda described the project as a privilege for the Philippines to benefit from the Peace Corps and IBM partnership.

"Through our combined strengths, we aim to make sustainable impact to the communities we will both serve," said Pineda, adding their collaboration with IRRI and Searca is unique more so with two rice institutions responding to agriculture's regional and global challenges.

Raper said they are now presently choosing the next batch of IBMers to join the lined-up projects through 2017. "We have probably 10 times more applying to into these projects than they were able to go… it is very competitive and something that people really want to do," he said.

IBM started the CSC in 2008, its *pro bono* consulting program aimed at helping find solutions to some of the most challenging problems in communities worldwide while giving IBM employees with unique leadership development.



# Peace Corps Volunteers to Improve Monitoring & Evaluation with DataWinners
January 10, 2017
Region: AF
Post: Madagascar
Source: http://hni.org/blog/2017/01/10/peace-corps-volunteers-to-improve-me-with-datawinners/

Peace Corps/Madagascar MERI Committee Training Workshop

HNI’s Third-Year Peace Corps Volunteer, Julissa Soriano, assisted the DataWinners Client Support team in coordinating a two-day DataWinners training workshop for 15 fellow Peace Corps Volunteers in Madagascar.

The workshop covered a range of functions using HNIs mobile data collection platform, from building a simple questionnaire all the way to Advanced Questionnaires with XLSForm, which the PCVs enjoyed creating.

Volunteers left with an abundant amount of knowledge and have initiated a Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting, and Improvement (MERI) committee. The MERI Committee aims to improve and modify the way volunteers approach reporting forms and programming events not only in Madagascar but worldwide.

The workshop was held in October 2016.



===== Volunteers =====

No voice is more important for understanding the perspective of Volunteers than the Volunteer themselves. Recent years have been an amazing diffusion of Volunteer personal blogs and platforms to capture their voice, their perspective, and their impact.

These stories highlight just a few of the stories gathered that show the range of projects carried out by Volunteers that highlight their use of ICT-related activities in their service.



# The Digital Divide in Morocco: Reflections of a Peace Corps volunteer
May 17, 2002
Region: EMA
Post: Morocco
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20030627064150/http://www.digitalopportunity.org/fulltext/werberg20020517.shtml

Between 1997 and 2000, I served as a volunteer with the U.S. Peace Corps in Morocco. My assignment was in a university library, but I was able to visit with the staff of libraries and information centers throughout the country. The manifestation of the digital divide in Morocco was apparent in both formal and informal circumstances, rural and urban. While North African and Middle Eastern countries are each at a different stage in their development and use of technology, the situation in Morocco is in many ways representative of what is happening throughout the region.

The level of computer and Internet literacy in Morocco had been quite low throughout the early 1990's, but when the Internet came to Morocco in the form of the neighborhood cybercafé, the younger generation embraced the new technology. With cybercafés located in all of the major cities -- and even smaller towns and villages -- the general knowledge and recognition of the Internet has drastically increased. Among the older generations, along with the working poor, the Internet is something that is vaguely familiar but rarely seen or experienced. The most recent published estimates of Internet users in Morocco range from 40,000 to 80,000 users out of a population of 30.6 million. This is undoubtedly a low estimate because it does not always include cybercafé patrons.

The digital divide can occur at many levels, but in Morocco I experienced the divide from several perspectives, including the lack of availability of ICT materials and the level and depth of training.

## The Materials Divide

The basic challenge of accessing IT materials varies from community to community. The wealthy in Morocco have access to the latest computer hardware and Internet connectivity. Internet access costs are similar to what we pay in the U.S -- dialup access starting at around USD $15 per month. The growing Moroccan middle class, in the major cities at least, has access to the Internet at cybercafés for about one U.S. dollar an hour. The available machines come equipped with the latest hardware and software technologies. Yet while these materials are available for purchase, acquiring them is still limited to those who can afford them. The availability of computers in schools and public libraries is not yet widespread in Morocco.

Even though dial-up Internet access is available at rates comparable to U.S. prices, they require a greater portion of the average Moroccan's wages. Local dial-up Internet service providers are available in most cities and larger towns, but users must also pay for each minute on a local call, which can raise the overall cost of access significantly. Recently, some of the major Internet providers have begun offering special rates that will hopefully bring these costs down.

Even with ICT materials largely available, maintaining them is an entirely another dilemma. Cables, ribbons, cartridges, keyboard, mice -- all of these things commonly break or need replacement throughout the life of one computer system. Having a ready supply, or a nearby store, is not always possible, especially in rural Moroccan communities. It is not uncommon for the budgets of public institutions to make money available for an initial computer purchase, but not supply funds for upgrades and maintenance.

In addition to hardware, software obviously needs to be purchased, updated and licensed; because of this, it's no more surprising to find cases of software piracy in Morocco as you would anywhere else. Perhaps a more serious issue is the availability of the right software in the right language. Many Moroccans are bilingual, even multilingual, especially among the well-educated. Many computers are equipped to toggle between the Arabic and the Roman alphabets. Some computers have an English operating system installed, with English-language software, but the physical keyboards are still in the French layout. But the majority of Moroccans prefer to converse in Moroccan Arabic or one of several Amazigh (indigenous, pre-Arabic) dialects that are spoken by over half of the country. And in the far north, Spanish is often more common than French. This diversity of languages and languages skills adds and extra layer of complexity when it comes to providing appropriate software -- as well as the training to go with it.

## Equitable Training and Education

ICT training is the driver of sustainable ICT access, requiring a combination of finding the right people, the right locations, the right times, and the right methodology. Without a structure in place to ensure that the new knowledge is dispersed equitably throughout society, any amount of physical material would be useless. This is why access to training resources in the languages of each community is crucial. The plethora of languages in Morocco poses a particular challenge when acquiring or creating training resources.

There are some very good schools and private courses throughout Morocco that turn out skilled computer programming graduates, as well as a variety of beginner courses at cybercafés. The dilemma is new graduates of the professional programs are often so attracted to entering the private sector directly that there is limited skilled personnel left for training the public at large. And despite the recent surge in cybercafés, their staff often lack the training or the patience to teach others.

## Solutions

While an answer to material needs is for increased capital in the hands of everyday citizens, the Moroccan government and private entities can and should provide a foundation on which communities can build. To date, government support has come in the form of grants, direct investment in the educational infrastructure and state funding of a better Internet backbone. Additionally, the Moroccan Ministry of Culture has taken an active lead in promoting and supporting a public library system throughout the country, which hopefully can lead to broader access to computers for training.

Donations from business and foreign organizations are always welcome, but this material can sometimes pose a problem. It's hard when you've been brought up to "never look a gift horse in the mouth", but sometimes you just have to say no to that circa 1989 machine than can run Windows 3.1 and little more.

By setting up institutions such as public libraries and cooperative academic networks, a necessity for training is built into the system. At the same time, in the private sector, Internet use in offices and the widespread availability of cybercafés has created an upswell of eager learners, from novice to expert level. The ministries are beginning to strongly encourage the training of staff and parents are eager to have their children take what opportunities exist to learn the new technologies.

I found that Moroccan society was generally very accepting of the Internet and those who had access to the resources embraced the new technologies with ease. This is only a small portion of the population though and those who did not have ready access to the necessary resources were, and still are, left out.

Moroccan society is much more group and family oriented than life in the US or other Western societies, and it would seem the individualistic nature of using the Internet would not be encouraged. While this was certainly true in family situations at home, most Moroccans I met had an innate desire to learn and a strong desire to interact with others. Communicative technologies such as email and chat rooms allow the younger generations of Morocco the freedom to interact with each other, and serve a similar purpose to the evening promenade, a leisurely stroll around the neighborhood to catch up on friends and relatives. This incorporation of new technology into an old culture's daily activities remains one of the leading drivers of Internet use in Morocco.

In summary, while technology, training materials and skilled trainers are available, the digital divide in Morocco is real and remains a drag on a society that is very much a regional leader in many other areas. The projects listed in the footnotes are just a few examples of how the Kingdom of Morocco continues to push the envelope and move forward with technology. A combination of community-based initiatives, funding, and curiosity will sustain these efforts and further serve to bridge this gap.

*Sam Werberg is a consultant in the Technology, Information and Communications Group of the global business advisory firm FIND/SVP. Sam also volunteers as an Internet tutor in the Adult Learner Program of the Queens Borough Public Library in New York City.



# IT in the Dominican Republic
August 8, 2003
Region: IAP
Post: Dominican Republic
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20050417235142/http://www.intothefog.com/peacecorps/project.html

## Background

The Information Technology (IT) project in the Education sector was new in the Dominican Republic in 2001. The original 15 volunteers of my training group, including myself, assigned to this project were the pioneers (read experimental) in this area. The 1996-2000 government, under President Leonel Fernandez, implemented an amazing plan to put computer labs in every high school in the country. Unfortunately no system was established for the training to use, nor the maintenance of, the computers. After coming into office in the summer, the new Secretary of Education, ordered a report from USAID in the fall of 2000 to evaluate the effectiveness of the Ten-Year Plan from 1992 and the state of education in the country. The report, which also evaluated the computer centers, was not very complimentary to the educational system and made some very difficult recommendations. At the same time, Peace Corps Dominican Republic received a new director who, in working with the head of the education sector within the office, saw the potential value to education of placing volunteers in communities with computer laboratories. In December of 2000 the director put in a request to Peace Corps Washington for IT volunteers and my group arrived in country the first week of February, 2001.

## Training

The difficulty in training our group came mainly from a lack of experience and a lack of expectations. It being a new project, and they being a new government, no one really knew what the role of the volunteers would or should be. Since our role was undefined it was extremely difficult for the trainers to anticipate the practical knowledge we would need. It was also hard for us to visualize where and how we were expected to work. By the end of the 12-week training period there was a general goal presented, apparently based on the recommendations of the USAID report and other sources. "Computers should first be used as aids to teachers in class preparation, didactic and pedagogic development and related applications."* The first objective to obtaining this goal was to give basic computer training to the teachers.

The normal process of volunteer placement into sites begins with a private institution expressing interest in a volunteer for a particular locale. Instead, in this case, the requesting institution was the government and the locale was the entire country. Somewhere in the process it was decided to initialize the project along the border with Haiti, where statistically the Dominican population is more disadvantaged. Unfortunately, the site selection was then determined almost entirely geographically, instead of on the willingness and readiness of the community to work with the volunteer. This caused many working problems for the volunteers of this first group. (Subsequent site placements for ITVs were made with more community evaluation.)

## The First Year

With my limited Spanish and development concepts, I set out to Montecristi in May 2001 with the first objective on my mind; to teach teachers computers. By mid-June I had developed a curriculum for a basic course and was already in the school teaching. Over the following year I created three different levels and gave a total of 9 courses to anyone employed by the Secretary of Education. I found the work completely frustrating at times and very slow to develop.

The physical infrastructure of the Dominican Republic, in terms of electricity (and water), was not reliable enough to handle computer laboratories. Computers don't work when there is no energy, and are negatively affected by frequent power outages. While most computers were outfitted with a Universal Power System (UPS) to provide the necessary energy to shut down properly, the labs as wholes were not provided a source of power. I can't tell you how many hours I sat with my classes, just waiting for the electricity to come, or to come on stronger. So many cancelled classes. So much wasted time.

Another huge fundamental problem was the inability of the government to maintain these labs. On a more general level, any report on the state of education in the Dominican Republic at that time would have revealed that it was far too centralized. With reference to the computer laboratories, the problem of maintenance was even more exaggerated by centralization. All repairs had to be done by technicians in the capital city (5 hours from my site) and to receive any part out of storage, no matter how small, the requisition had to be signed by 24 people! The main laboratory I was working in had several non-working computers and small things would break all the time. We had no support from the government which contributed to my frustration, and to that of the teachers as well.

By defining the goals of the project so narrowly, "to teach teachers computers," a couple fundamental development issues arose. The first problem, and probably most detrimental, was the loss of focus on the general development process and the idea of sustainability. By making the objective of the volunteer to "train teachers in the use of the computer," there was no reference to how exactly that would affect the quality of education or how the training would be sustained after the volunteer departed. I remember asking the Peace Corps Program Director for Education in my first month if the *normal* schools (teacher training schools) would be offering similar courses to the ones I was giving so that all new teachers would arrive pre-trained. The answer was very unclear, which in Dominican terms means no, not really. There existed no plan that I knew of for Dominicans to continue the training process begun by volunteers. Essentially the project was not going to grow over time and worse still, it was not sustainable by the local community.

The other development issue was that there was no system of use. For example, ask a typical teacher that attended and graduated from my course in the summer of 2001 how to save a Word document and they probably will not be able to tell you. It's not that they didn't learn how during that brief period, but that they have had no opportunity to practice their knowledge since then. The large majority of people in these communities do not have personal computers in their homes, the laboratory was their only source, but there was no system for use outside the few class hours the computer teacher was supposedly giving to the students. This caused me to question: Why should I, or any volunteer, continue to train the teachers, and why should the teachers learn, if they will never be able to use their skills?

Despite all the above points, I continued with the objective to give basic computer training to the teachers of Montecristi in the constantly diminishing laboratory. We frequently had to cancel class due to the lack of electricity and/or broken equipment. Yet, I persevered for a year because it seemed to me I had been told that this was my work. The situation was worse in Manzanillo, where 10 new computers, a printer, and a satellite server sat in a room, **in boxes, for three years**, because the electricity was never connected into the laboratory. No action was ever taken, until I arrived, to try to install a transformer on a pole, buy a small generator, or obtain solar panels. No student or teacher had ever stepped foot into this laboratory, and I seemed unable to change that.

## The Second Year

In early May, 2002, Peace Corps Dominican Republic presented a new format for the Annual Work Plan that each volunteer is to fill out. It came with the goals and objectives for each sector already provided and I noticed that the IT project had changed slightly and broadened over the year. The old objective was still there, but there were now objectives referring to training "how to optimize and maintain IT hardware and software" for teachers and youth groups. While I did know various things about computers, I was not a computer technician and I didn't feel qualified to implement this type of training. The benefit of having to fill out an Annual Work plan though, was that I stopped to analyze the previous year. I realized everything that I just mentioned above and decided to reevaluate the given objectives in relation to the overarching goal. The project purpose was: "To improve the availability and quality of education in rural and marginal urban schools through training teachers, students and other community members in how to use information technology (IT) to teach and learn more effectively, as well as eventually generate greater income for themselves."

At the same time I was rethinking my objectives, Luis Rodriguez was advising the Secretary of Education (SEE) to decentralize the laboratories. He advocated community ownership of the labs so that maintenance could be local and a more productive system of use could be established. I think that this helped remind me what Peace Corps development work was really all about; helping the community help itself in a sustainable manner. The Dominican Republic is full of people who can adequately train teachers on the computer and has a growing private sector of computer technicians. This is not the type of training we as volunteers should have be giving. Instead we should have been empowering the community to take charge of their laboratory and look for local resources.

After I talked to several graduate students from the Kennedy School, and did a little research on the Web, I came to realize that developing community interest and commitment was the first step recommended by all organizations developing similar projects. Sometimes I wondered why it took us so long to come to a conclusion that was already widely known and accepted. If you are interested in development in regards to Information and Communication Technology (ICT), in particular reference to education, I would like to recommend the following websites: [World Links](http://www.world-links.org/english/), [Schools Online](http://www.schoolsonline.org/), and [TechKnowLogia](http://www.techknowlogia.org/).

Feeling newly motivated, I cut my teacher training classes down to one (in Dajabon) and focused my energy on finding a solution for the lab of Manzanillo. I tried to get members of the community, particularly the teachers, to form a committee to raise the funds to buy a small electric generator for the lab. Because computers in the community were so rare and usually used by young boys to check pornography, no one was too interested in dedicating their time or effort. They didn¹t understand the advantages to having a lab like this in their school and community. Plus, only about 1 of 10 teachers actually care about the education of their students and the quality of their own work. The rest are just there to collect their paycheck and are definitely not going to put in any more effort than is required.

Simultaneously, I tried to get a transformer installed at the school so we could harness the small amount of electricity in the street and use the computers sporadically. After a lot of noise making and networking, I got the SEE to bring me the transformer, but then I was left trying to get a pole in the ground to install it. Again I battled with members of the community, but was never successful.

My big break came when, in November 2002, a private company installed a town generator, providing stable electricity almost 24 hours a day. (It has since become a lot more erratic.) After the holidays, I managed to get a local electrician to donate his time to connect the classroom containing the computers directly to the circuit in the school. We then took the computers out of their boxes for the first time and set them up.

After a couple rough starts, we opened the lab the first week of February 2003. My counterpart (the computer teacher who had been collecting a paycheck for over three years but had not yet taught a single class in the school), opened the lab in the mornings, during school hours, to students with a free hour. I opened the lab in the afternoons to anyone who wanted to pay RD$5 (US$0.20-$0.25) for an hour of use. The afternoon sessions were an immediate success and we had to expand the schedule of open hours and limit users to two hours a day so that more people could have a turn.

I formed a Technology Club with some of the more interested students. I didn¹t really have enough time to reach my goals with them, but I had envisioned them as the keepers of the lab. The money that was collected in the afternoons was used to buy paper, ink, computer covers and a dry-erase board. It enabled the lab to be independent of the centralized government system of 24 signatures for a new mouse. Unfortunately, I only had three months to work with them and it was too soon for them to function alone. That is why I requested a replacement volunteer to continue my work. He hopefully will not only continue with the Technology Club and push towards independence and sustainability, but he will also teach the teachers how to use the computers to their advantage.

I am still not entirely convinced that using the computers in the classroom improves education. Has it improved education in this country? Having them as an available resource and assigning projects that utilize them are definitely beneficial actions, but I don¹t know if they should be used instead of traditional classroom time. In the DR, they have so little classroom time as it is and it could easily become a way for teachers to do even less work. And, as I have pointed out to many people, the Internet is an amazing thing, but you don¹t learn too much from it if you can¹t read. Basic education can never be skipped.



# GirlTech Uganda 2012
August 19, 2012
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - GirlTech
excerpt: Update on camp from African Science Heroes Website.
Source: http://rashidainuganda.blogspot.com/2012/08/girltech-uganda.html

## What is GirlTech Uganda?

GirlTech is a professional development program for early secondary girl students, encouraging them to pursue advanced education and careers in science, math, and technology. The week-long program had 79 participants, all girls from secondary 1-3 levels, from all parts of Uganda. As far as we know, it's the first program of its kind in Uganda. Another PCV, Stevie Bergman, and I have been somehow planning this program for about a year now, and it was truly amazing to see it happen!

Activities included daily computer sessions, life skills sessions (re-usable menstrual pads, HIV/AIDS, assertive communication), science sessions, and guest speakers: female Ugandans who work in science or technology fields. We were fortunate to have a forestry supervisor, a fisheries biologist, a doctor, an architect, and a forensic scientist come and share their experiences with the girls. Science sessions included bottle rockets/forces of flight, projectiles, disease detectives (my shameless push for epidemiology!), and volcanoes, where girls got to make their own baking soda volcanoes. Each day was started with a "mad science" session, demonstrating a cool science experiment, intended to "blow their minds!" We also did an awesome astronomy night and two tower of strength competitions, where girls had to create the tallest structure out of limited materials. At the end of the week, we had a science fair where girls showcased science projects they worked on throughout the week.

Our "call to attention" for the week, which we used whenever we had to get the attention of 100+ people was:

**Call**: Pi
**Response**: Pi
**Call**: Pi
**Response**: Pi
**Call**: 3.14!
**Response**: 159!

It worked really well, and was also quite entertaining!

Willysha and Sara wrote the amazing GirlTech song, to the tune of "My Favorite Things":

## Girl Tech Anthem!

_Beakers and test tubes and Bunsen Burners_
_Animal dissections and scientific learners._
_Chemical reactions and Goldberg Machines._
_These are a few of our favorite things._

_Mercury and Neptune, Saturn and Venus_
_Earth, Jupiter, Mars and Uranus._
_Planets and stars that shine like flames._
_These are a few of our favorite things._

_When they tell us don't do science, cause you're simply girls._
_That's when we prove to them using our brains._
_We're Girl Tech girls!_

Thank you to everyone who made GirlTech possible! We had the most amazing staff members who made miracles happen throughout the week. What a great way to end my Peace Corps service :)



# ChatSalud - A Nicaraguan Revolution of a Different Kind
November 3, 2012
By Lauren Spigel
Region: IAP
Post: Nicaragua
project: Nicaragua - Chat Salud
excerpt: FrontlineSMS blurb about Chat Salud
Source: http://frontlinesms.ning.com/profiles/blogs/chatsalud-a-nicaraguan-revolution-of-a-different-kind

According to the International Telecommunication Union, approximately 8 out of 10 Nicaraguans have cell phones ([ITU 2011](http://www.telcor.gob.ni/Desplegar.asp?PAG*ID=47)). And according to the [Nicaraguan Dispatch](http://www.nicaraguadispatch.com/news/2012/09/nicaragua-courts-chinese-telecom-giants/5289), all 153 municipalities have cell phone coverage (17 Sept. 2012). This means that if you live in a city or out in the most rural of rural places, you have a cell phone. If your family is rich or if your family is poor, you have a cell phone. If you have running water or if you schlep buckets from the river every day, you have a cell phone. And despite a nominal texting fee, you use it daily. You use it to chat with your friends. You use it to chat with your relatives. You use it to forward cute little poems about Mother's Day, and birthdays, and friendship. And even when you don't have electricity, you walk to the nearest place where there is electricity and charge your cell phone there, so you can keep using it from home.

With a country as connected as Nicaragua, it's a wonder that we still hear statistics such as: 1 out of 3 adolescent girls will be pregnant by the time they reach the age of 19 ([INIDE](http://www.inide.gob.ni/bibliovirtual/Publicacion09/EndesaV.ingles.pdf) 2005); and nearly 3 out of 4 women between 15 and 49 have reported physical and/or sexual violence at some point in their lives–a level that is, according to the WHO, 57 times higher than what is considered an epidemic ([Nicaraguan Dispatch](http://www.nicaraguadispatch.com/news/2012/10/preventing-violence-against-women/5683), 17 Oct. 2012). After a year and a half of talking about sexual and reproductive health with rural women during my Peace Corps service, I've learned that a major barrier to seeking sexual health information is the PERCEPTION that if a woman asks a medical professional for condoms, or for an HIV test, or simply for information regarding her sexual health, her community will find out and think her to be "unfaithful," "a prostitute," or "a bad woman." The only way to access information from a trained professional is a face-to-face conversation, and many women can't bare the potential embarrassment.

Meanwhile, in several developing countries, a new revolution is taking hold. Mobile health, or mHealth, is a movement that harnesses mobile phones to promote positive social change. For instance, in Uganda, cell phones with cameras of at least two megapixels are being used to diagnose Malaria, simply by swabbing a drop of blood on the lens, snapping a picture, and sending it directly to a lab ([Scientific America](http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/2011/12/14/cell-phone-cameras-capture-microscopic-images-to-diagnose-malaria-and-other-diseases/), 14 Dec 2011). According to Scientific America, the blood samples "were often so clear that specific stages of the malaria parasite could be identified." Similarly, in Nairobi, Kenya and in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, a project called m4RH (Mobile for Reproductive Health) has developed a series of interactive text messages about family planning, which the 13,000 users can access via text messaging from their cell phones (try out the system for free on the [m4RH website](http://www.fhi360.org/hld/Mobile*Reproductive*Health/index.html)! Click "m4RH Demo" on the right-hand side bar. It's super cool!) Research has indicated that this simple technology is influencing behavior change with regards to family planning.

Similarly, for the past six months, I have been working with a couple other PCVs, the Nicaraguan Red Cross, the Ministry of Health, and other local partners to create ChatSalud, the first-ever sexual and reproductive health SMS-based hotline in Nicaragua. The goal is to use low-cost mobile phones to provide a 100% anonymous means for Nicaraguans to access sexual and reproductive health information. According to the m4RH study, users indicated that they like the privacy of text messaging. For instance, a woman could be lying next to her partner in bed and text ChatSalud, "how do I convince my partner to use a condom?" and he would be none the wiser. A user could be sitting in the middle of a crowded bus and text "how do I know if I am HIV positive?" And no one would know. It can eliminate barriers to accessing health information for the 4.8 million cell phone users in Nicaragua.

The way ChatSalud will work is much like how m4RH runs (seriously–check out the[demo](http://www.fhi360.org/hld/Mobile*Reproductive*Health/index.html)!) but with a larger scope. While m4RH only covers family planning methods, ChatSalud will cover HIV/AIDS, STIs, Safer Sexual Practices, Family Planning, and Risk Factors during Pregnancy, Birth, and Postpartum. Like m4RH, part of the hotline will be automated. Simply by typing "info" or "1″ (we haven't decided yet) to ChatSalud, you'll receive an automatic response with a menu list of options. The menu would say, for instance, type "2″ for information regarding HIV; "3″ for information regarding STIs; "4″ for information regarding Safer Sex…etc. Check out this picture of my cell phone when we were testing out the system:

For questions that cannot be answered by our automatic system, we will train the Nicaraguan Red Cross's existing core of volunteers on how to be hotline operators so that they can add an element of genuine human interaction to ChatSalud. We are also exploring the opportunity of merging interests with local universities such as UNAN's [CIES](http://www.cies.edu.ni/cies/)(Center for Investigations and Studies in Public Health) and local health centers to target specific populations for appointment reminders.

**So where are we at with the project?**

* In early October, Nishant, Gabe, and I recruited four Health 58ers: Hannah, Chloe, Talia, and Jessica, to learn everything there is to know about ChatSalud before our group departs in March, because they'll still have another year.
* Nishant and I presented ChatSalud to [CONISIDA](http://www.undp.org.ni/files/contrataciones/1237303619*TDR*Contador*Administrativo*CONISIDA[1].pdf), the Nicaraguan Commission on Aids on October 17 (my 25th birthday!) If they like the project, they will write a letter of support saying that the Nicaraguan Red Cross can officially partner with us.
* Afterwards, we need to re-approach [Claro](http://www.claro.com.ni/wps/portal/ni/pc/personas), one of the two major phone companies in Nicaragua, (Nishant originally gave a presentation to them back in September), and see if they can, minimally, provide us with free text messaging.
* We need to find a **developer** with some Java know-how who can help us add some functions to [FrontlineSMS](http://www.frontlinesms.com/), the open-source software that we will use to run ChatSalud.
* We are also in the process of testing out the ChatSalud system on FrontlineSMS, which includes writing in all of the automated responses and working out any kinks that surface.
* Look for a funding source.
* And lastly, we'll need to plan an intensive training session for the core of Red Cross Volunteers who will be the hotline operators.

ChatSalud is the major project I am focusing on at this point in my Peace Corps service. I hope we get it off the ground before my departure in March–if not, I might consider extending for a few months. With each week that passes, ChatSalud is gaining more and more momentum. It's hard to believe that this project started with Nishant, Gabe, and I sitting around a table in a coffee shop thinking that all we'd need was a cell phone and a couple PCVs to answer questions, when now it has the potential to become a major national-level project with functions that can serve at-risk populations, collect data for the Ministry of Health, and become an influential example of how mHealth can thrive in Nicaragua as well as Latin America at large. Thank you to Peace Corps staff for supporting us 100% of the time. Updates to come!



# Bugesera to Host ICT Camp for Rwandan Female Secondary School Students
May 8, 2013
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: Camp TechKobwa an ICT camp for Rwandan secondary school students is being organized by volunteers from the Peace Corps, Girls In ICT Rwanda and kLab.
Source: http://en.igihe.com/news/bugesera-to-host-ict-camp-for-rwandan-female.html

The camp will run from the 5th to the 9th of August 2013 and will be held at Gashora Girls Academy of Science and Technology in Gashora Sector/ Bugasera District.

The camp will host 48 female students from different secondary schools in Rwanda.

The volunteers, led by Lyla Fujiwara, a Peace Corps volunteer and Computer Science Teacher at Gashora Girls Academy, were inspired by Rwanda’s resilient and ever growing energy for information technology and communications.

The purpose of Camp TechKobwa is to provide the students with unhindered access to computers in order to develop skills and creativity in using technology as well as to inspire them as the next generation of Rwandan technology entrepreneurs.

The camp will encourage the young women to become active citizens by building their self-esteem and confidence, and empower them to start computer and media clubs with their ICT teachers upon return to their schools.

In partnership between Girls in ICT Rwanda, kLab, and the Peace Corps, Camp TechKobwa is an ideal way to offer adolescent girls self-development opportunities in a fun and friendly atmosphere.

During the camp, different role models for students have been invited. On Wednesday there will be a Women in the Media panel and on Thursday there will be a Women in Tech panel. The camp is completely free of charge to every participant.

This was made possible through the work of the volunteers from as well as financial support from the Peace Corps and the Ministry of Youth & ICT.

Members of the press are invited to attend the closing ceremony of the camp that will take place at 13h00 on Friday the 9th of August 2013.



# Nicaraguans Turn to their Phones for Reproductive Health
June 19, 2013
By Chloe Lew
Region: IAP
Post: Nicaragua
project: Nicaragua - Chat Salud
excerpt: National Geographic article on Chat Salud
Source: http://voices.nationalgeographic.com/2013/06/19/reach-for-your-pocket-nicaraguans-turn-to-their-phones-for-reproductive-health/

Access to the Internet is something often taken for granted in the Western world. For many of us it's a handy way to share our thoughts and lives over social media, or to keep in touch with friends, or to look up the latest sports scores. For many people in the developing world the Internet promises much more, if only they had access to it. In this installment of Digital Diversity, Chloe Lew, a Peace Corps Volunteer in Nicaragua, shares details of a project which bypasses the need for the Internet and focuses on girls' empowerment and teen pregnancy prevention through widely accessible text messaging.

[Digital Diversity](http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/tag/digital-diversity/) is a series of blog posts from kiwanja.net featuring the many ways mobile phones and other appropriate technologies are being used throughout the world to improve, enrich, and empower billions of lives. This article was curated by Gabrielle Lepore, our Media and Research Assistant.

Yesterday I googled "safer sex."

You've possibly done it too. Most people have. Perhaps you wanted to double check something that your friends were talking about or maybe you were simply curious about an aspect of your own health and didn't want to navigate a face-to-face discussion.

While sex permeates many aspects of our lives, including health, relationships, self-esteem and gender dynamics, it is still a sensitive and often uncomfortable subject. For topics such as sex, the Internet is particularly useful. One of its unappreciated beauties is that you don't need to endure the discomfort of an in-person conversation. Instead, you can investigate your concerns and questions in private. After all, your search engine can't judge you.

But how do you get the answers you need when you don't have Internet access?

In January 2012 I moved to Nicaragua to serve as a reproductive health educator with Peace Corps. During my training a fellow volunteer suggested that one of our roles as volunteers was to serve as Google for our communities. At first I found this idea slightly condescending – I don't have all of the answers. But then I understood his point. In more-developed countries people are used to finding answers to intimate questions independently. However, in a country like Nicaragua, where only 10.6% of the population have Internet access most people do not have the luxury of finding immediate answers to more embarrassing inquiries in an anonymous manner.

In smaller communities the reality is that the public health system is not easily accessible. This is due to a number of barriers, including geography, socioeconomics and culture. Additionally, generations of cultural beliefs have led to the perpetuation of false information. Getting correct answers to sensitive questions generally requires a face-to-face conversation, and in small communities this usually involves friends, family, or both – even in the medical center. Anonymity is rare and *pena,* meaning embarrassment, shame, or shyness, is abundant.

*Pena* is particularly extreme in Nicaragua where *machismo*, or macho culture, is rampant. *Machismo* helps to propagate the perception that a woman who enquires about her sexual reproductive health (SRH) or asks for condoms is promiscuous or unchaste. As such, *pena*, along with other barriers, is one of the greatest impediments to the dissemination of and access to scientifically correct SRH information, and the consequences are quite evident.

Nicaragua has the highest teen pregnancy rate in Central America. Approximately 1 out of 4 adolescent girls will become pregnant before they reach the age of 19. Another frightful statistic is that nearly 48% of women who are married or in a union are affected by gender-based violence, which, according to World Health Organization, is 57 times higher than what is considered an epidemic ([Nicaraguan Dispatch](http://www.nicaraguadispatch.com/news/2012/10/preventing-violence-against-women/5683), 17 Oct. 2012). Although historically Nicaragua has had the lowest rate of HIV infections in Central America, the annual incidence of registered cases of HIV has tripled in the past six years.

Like everyone, Nicaraguans have questions about their SRH and want to make informed decisions. While Google is not an accessible or familiar resource to those living without the Internet, Peace Corps volunteers have identified a different tool that can help Nicaraguans bypass the "*pena* barrier" that needs no cultural adoption – the cell phone.

Cell phones are one of the most ubiquitous and transformative agents of social change ever. The reality is that, in Nicaragua, more people have access to cell phones than to indoor plumbing or electricity. According to the International Telecommunications Union, in 2011 82% of the Nicaraguan population had a cell phone, with coverage in 151 out of the 153 municipalities – and these numbers have only been increasing. Nicaraguans rich and poor, from city centers and rural mountains, with and without access to running water, all have cell phones and use them daily.

If people can text "*amor*" to 3766 to discover who the love of their life will be, why can't we also harness the power of cell phones to disseminate vital SRH information and resources to those who need and want it most? After months of discussing various strategies for using cell phones to deliver health messages, Peace Corps volunteers and their Nicaraguan colleagues settled on a platform: **ChatSalud**.

ChatSalud, an SMS-based sexual and reproductive health hotline, is the first of its kind in Nicaragua. The goal is to empower Nicaraguans to lead healthier, safer, and more productive lives by providing correct SRH information and connecting them to local resources in a free, confidential, reliable, and accessible manner, directly to their cell phones.

Using [FrontlineSMS](http://www.frontlinesms.com), a free, open-source software, we have been able to leverage its auto-response function to create a platform that will deliver culturally sensitive and contextually correct information on five central themes – reproductive health, safer sex, HIV/AIDS, STIs and domestic violence. The system is entirely demand-driven and interactive, with users able to select which theme to explore and from there select the information he or she wants to receive.

For example, a 16-year-old girl living in a rural community thinks she is ready to have sex with her boyfriend for the first time. She is too scared to ask her parents for advice and is uncomfortable broaching the subject with the doctor at the health center since he also lives in her community. She decides to text ChatSalud for information on safer sex and condom negotiation. She begins by texting "info" to ChatSalud and automatically receives a text in response that contains a menu of informational categories. The menu says "Text 1 for HIV", "2 for STIs", "3 for safer sex" and so on. She texts "3" and educates herself about how to protect her health and avoid an unwanted pregnancy. After receiving the interactive automated messages, she feels more confident about negotiating condom use with her boyfriend and about protecting herself from an unhealthy relationship.

From teenage girls approaching their first sexual relationships to men wanting more information on STIs after noticing a potential symptom, to women concerned about the cycle of violence who are looking for domestic violence resources in their communities, ChatSalud is a resource for all Nicaraguans.

Since its inception, ChatSalud has grown substantially both in scope and in support. The project has received tremendous interest from the public and private sectors in Nicaragua. Almost entirely funded by local in-kind contributions, the project is low-cost and will be free to Nicaraguan users. The Nicaraguan Red Cross serves as the main project partner with Peace Corps, keeping the focus on sustainability and cultural application. With chapters in every department across Nicaragua, the Red Cross will be particularly vital in the promotion and marketing of the hotline.

However, much of the success depends on the strength and relevance of the content. The World Bank in Nicaragua has connected the ChatSalud team to NGOs and local actors across the country to develop the content and organizational structure, and to ensure the program's longevity. In addition, a local technology company is working to strengthen the back-end functionality and to provide the user with a seamless experience. We are extremely grateful for the advice and dedication from all of our project partners who are committed to ChatSalud, a service developed by Nicaraguans for Nicaraguans.

ChatSalud is still in development. The Peace Corps and Nicaraguan partners are currently finalizing content, system and evaluation tools, but hope to begin the first phase of the project in the coming months. Stay tuned for more updates as we perfect and launch the service. For more information, please email us at [chatsalud@gmail.com](mailto:chatsalud@gmail.com) or follow us on [Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/ChatSalud).

[Digital Diversity](http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/tag/digital-diversity/) is produced by **Ken Banks**, innovator, mentor, anthropologist, [National Geographic Emerging Explorer](http://www.nationalgeographic.com/explorers/bios/ken-banks/) and Founder of kiwanja.net, [FrontlineSMS](http://www.frontlinesms.com/) and [Means of Exchange](http://www.meansofexchange.com). He shares exciting stories in "Digital Diversity" about how mobile phones and appropriate technologies are being used throughout the world to improve, enrich, and empower billions of lives. You can follow him on Twitter [@kiwanja](http://www.twitter.com/kiwanja)



# Peace Corps Volunteer Promotes Computer Literacy in Cameroon
July 31, 2013
Region: AF
Post: Cameroon
project: Cameroon - Computer Literacy
excerpt: Project to fix up high school computer lab in Cameroon and provide electricity
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/article/2013/07/20130731279875.html#axzz3utyirdqn

**Washington**— Peace Corps volunteer Christian Freymeyer of Ocean Pines, Maryland, is working with his community in Cameroon to refurbish a school computer lab and boost its energy supply so more students can participate in computer lessons.

"Technology breeds innovation; however, in this rural high school in Cameroon, students are unable to receive adequate instruction in computer science due to the lack of basic infrastructure," said Freymeyer, according to a July 30 Peace Corps news release.

"While the school has more than 12 computers, only four are able to run at one time because the power voltage to the school is very low," he said.

The planned improvements will increase the school's electrical energy and install voltage regulators, surge protectors and new computer desks and chairs. Once the project is complete, the school's 12 computers will be operable at the same time.

The school administration, teachers and community representatives have all pledged to contribute to the project as well as donate goods and labor. Freymeyer will also train a committee to help maintain the new equipment.

"This community is forward-thinking and members understand that computer literacy is crucial to this generation's success," Freymeyer said. "This project aims to prepare students for their future, and computer literacy is becoming more and more essential."

Freymeyer, a graduate of Christopher Newport University, has been working as a computer literacy teacher in Cameroon since June 2011. To fix up the lab, he will use funds raised through the Peace Corps Partnership Program, which helps support Peace Corps volunteer community projects worldwide.

To receive funding through the Partnership Program, a community must make a 25 percent contribution to the total cost of the project and outline success indicators for it. This helps to ensure community ownership and a greater chance of long-term sustainability.

Nearly 3,380 Peace Corps volunteers have served in Cameroon since the program was established in 1962, and 231 volunteers are now serving in the country. They work in the areas of education, environment, agriculture, health, business and information technology. They are trained and work in Pidgin English and French.

For more on the Peace Corps and its work to promote peace, friendship and understanding worldwide, visit the [Peace Corps website](http://www.peacecorps.gov/).



# Computer Skills Enable Women To Support Families Communities
January 1, 2013
Region: IAP
Post: Vanuatu
project: Vanuatu - Computer Training
excerpt: Computer group training in Vanuatu
Source: http://files.peacecorps.gov/multimedia/pdf/media/pctimes2013*01.pdf

Volunteer Willow Denker (2011–2013) is helping seven women from across Vanuatu gain access to computers and learn basic computer skills. After recognizing the need for public access to computers and basic skills training, Denker and seven interested women formed Mamas’ Computer Group. The group meets regularly to learn computer skills and hold fundraising events to buy more computer equipment and attend advanced classes. The group recently raised money to attend a 20-hour typing class.



# Actually, There is an App for This: PCVs and Tech Experts Create Mobile Apps for Development
January 1, 2013
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
project: Zambia - Bantu Babel
excerpt: Highlight of Zambia Bantu Babel language translation app.
Source: http://files.peacecorps.gov/multimedia/pdf/media/pctimes2013*01.pdf

Mobile technology, more than any other modern tool, may just have the biggest impact on a Peace Corps Volunteer’s service today. In fact, according to the 2012 Annual Volunteer Survey, PCVs are more likely to have cellphone service than electricity or running water.

Moreover, three out of four people worldwide have access to a mobile phone, according to a 2012 World Bank study.

This rapidly closing digital divide presents new opportunities for Volunteers to engage their communities in ways unimaginable even just a few years ago.

Last September the agency launched the Innovation Challenge to engage the Peace Corps community in a global brainstorming session to create mobile-technology solutions for problems faced by Volunteers in the field.

On December 1–2, the Peace Corps collaborated with Random Hacks of Kindness—an organization that hosts semiannual coding events worldwide for developers to build open-source technology solutions—for a 48-hour global hackathon, where 1,200 coders and subject matter experts in 32 cities tackled real-world problems—and produced hundreds of app prototypes.

As one Volunteer in rural Zambia, Tony Tseng (2010–2013), said, “It is in [Volunteers’] best interest to use technology to equip ourselves and others” to accomplish all three Peace Corps goals.

Inspired by his country director and the potential of the Innovation Challenge, Tseng and fellow Zambia Volunteers Melissa Stelter, Robert Kent, and Rasa Kent (2011–2013) identified and defined a major challenge faced in their communities: language barriers between development workers and Zambians. Armed with a clear understanding of the communication obstacle posed by multiple in-country languages, the four teamed up with Bongo Hive, a local technology and innovation hub in Lusaka, to design a solution. There, they joined Zambian tech experts for a pioneering weekend of collaboration.

Led by Bongo Hive developer Daryl Lukas, the team crafted Bantu Babel, an Android app that provides a Tonga/English digital pocket dictionary and key Bemba survival phrases.

Stelter, who is nearing the end of her service, is confident that Bantu Babel will make a difference for future Volunteers and other aid workers. She and her fellow Volunteers were so invigorated by their collaboration with the local innovation hub that they plan to continue to develop both the scope of the app and the relationship between Peace Corps/ Zambia Volunteers and Bongo Hive in future hackathons.

Tseng concurred, “With the success of the hackathon event and the relationship now established with Peace Corps, I look forward to having Volunteers bring forth unique problems and together with Bongo Hive provide a unique solution.”

Lukas also raved about working with the Peace Corps Volunteers, saying it was a great opportunity to gain “insight about their work and this helped a lot even as we were defining problems and finding solutions [at the hackathon].”

Bantu Babel was not the only solution prototype to come out of Peace Corps Innovation Challenge and the RHoK global hackathon. From Germany to Georgia, coders created innovative mobile solutions to coordinate low-cost transportation in Ghana, sync sanitation data in Malawi, enhance citizen-government reporting in Ukraine, track financial accountability via text message for small NGOs and Volunteer projects, improve Volunteer safety tracking, find and rate NGOs working in-country via a searchable database with comment fields—the last three of which can be used globally—and more.

The excitement around the event has been far-reaching. Heather Lee of the University of Alabama at Birmingham Sparkman Center for Global Health, who connected PCVs in Zambia with Bongo Hive, said, “I just wanted to personally convey how excited I am about the Innovation Challenge and the potential apps that will come out of [it]…. President Obama’s emphasis on open access information initiatives and mobile technology in solving global health challenges is really exciting. I am a big believer in sharing information, especially since learning is a two-way street and there is a lot to be learned from folks in other countries.”

Volunteers, coders, and Peace Corps supporters around the world are now planning for the next RHoK Global hackathon, on June 1–2. Visit innovationchallenge.peacecorps.gov to submit an idea to solve a local community issue or to host or attend a hackathon event.



# Peace Corps Volunteers Create Mobile Language Application
January 1, 2013
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
project: Zambia - Bantu Babel
excerpt: App developed with help from Zambia PCV at Bongo Hive
Source: https://open.nasa.gov/blog/peace-corps-volunteers-create-mobile-language-application/

At [RHoK](http://www.rhok.org/blog/peace-corps-innovation-challenge-featured-problems) in December 2012, we introduced "*featured problem sets*" in an effort to create stronger and more refined challenges. The first featured problem set was offered by the Peace Corps as part of its "*Innovation Challenge*." The Peace Corps Innovation Challenge is a worldwide collaboration to develop innovative solutions for the real challenges faced by people throughout the developing world as identified and articulated by Peace Corps Volunteers. Today they announced that they will be doing a second Innovation Challenge and are seeking submissions of relevant problems through their [website](http://innovationchallenge.peacecorps.gov).

The submitted problems statements will then be reviewed and voted on by current and returned volunteers, Peace Corps staff, technology experts and entrepreneurs. The best problems will be offered at a hackathon in June 2013. Below is their press release, which describes one of the top solutions from the first Innovation Challenge – a Mobile Language Application developed by Zambian software developers that translates English words and phrases into one of seven languages spoken in Zambia. The app, Bantu Babel, is now available for Android compatible devices in the Google Play store. The NASA Open Innovation Program team worked closely with the Peace Corps on their first Innovation Challenge and continue to exchange best practices around effective mass collaborations like this.



# ChatSalud Aims to Empower Rural Nicaraguans to Advocate for their Sexual and Reproductive Health
January 31, 2013
Region: IAP
Post: Nicaragua
project: Nicaragua - Chat Salud
Source: http://www.frontlinesms.com/blog/2013/01/31/chatsalud-aims-to-empower-rural-nicaraguans-to-advocate-for-their-sexual-and-reproductive-health

ChatSalud will work as a "ping-pong" system, which is designed to be interactive in nature so that the user can customize their experience with the platform, deciding which information to read and which to skip, based on a series of menus and coded themes. Our "ping-pong" system is modeled after [FHI 360's Mobile for Reproductive Health project](http://www.fhi360.org/en/Research/Projects/Progress/GTL/mobile*tech.htm) in Kenya and Tanzania, though ChatSalud will differ in that it will cover a wider range of themes, ranging from HIV/AIDs, sexually transmitted infections, reproductive health, and safer sexual practices.

The user will initiate the interaction with ChatSalud after viewing an advertisement such as a poster, radio spot, or television ad, or through talking with friends and family that have used the system. The user will send "info" to ChatSalud and will automatically receive an initial menu that will include the four umbrella themes: HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted infections, reproductive health, and safer sexual practices. From there, the user can choose which theme to learn about. All of the themes are coded by number in the ChatSalud system. The coded automatic responses will give rural Nicaraguans low-tech, text-based access to a plethora of information—essentially a sexual and reproductive health encyclopedia at their fingertips.

ChatSalud is quickly becoming a national-level mobile health platform. While we used a modem for initial tests with limited users, the modem began experiencing a lag time of upwards of 45 minutes. Since we are expecting a high volume of SMS traffic, the throughput required will be significantly more than could be provided by a modem.

Obviously a new system was needed.

While still in development, the new system, which will utilize FrontlineSMS Version 2 mounted on servers and remote browser-based access, will bring together resources provided by several local stakeholders. CIES, the Nicaraguan School of Public Health, will donate and maintain their servers, which will house the FrontlineSMS version 2 software. Meanwhile, a local tech firm, [GüeGüe](http://www.guegue.com/), will provide technical support and assistance to secure and maintain a VPN between the software housed at CIES and the local telecommunications network. The VPN will provide key links to both Claro and Movistar, the local telecommunications providers, and from there, connect to users nation-wide. While the old system could only send and receive six text messages per minute, this new system will have the ability to handle millions of text messages per day, ensuring a smooth and instantaneous interaction between ChatSalud and its users.

In order to gain governmental support, one of the major barriers we had to overcome was to figure out how to make the system 100% anonymous. Normally, when a user communicates with ChatSalud, their personal phone number is displayed along with their message. While we cannot use cell phone numbers and maintain anonymity, an identifying feature was still necessary to allow us to analyze our user interactions. We were lucky to connect with developer [Alex Galonsky](http://www.galonsky.com), who generously donated his time to help us modify the program. Alex's solution was to hash the phone numbers of users as they come in to effectively create a "digital fingerprint" of each user without allowing system operators to view user phone numbers directly on the main interface. This allows us to provide basic anonymity to all users while still monitoring and evaluating the project's effectiveness. This will also ensure confidentiality if we use the platform to open up direct communication between users and health workers in the future.




# Peace Corps Volunteers Lead Tech Camp for Young Women in Rwanda
September 13, 2013
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: US Embassy overview of technology skills and youth development camp in Rwanda
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/article/2013/09/20130913282834.html#axzz3ref8jg6m

**Washington** — Peace Corps volunteers in Rwanda, led by Lyla Fujiwara of Rochester, New York, recently organized an information and communications technology camp to teach female secondary school students computer skills that will advance their confidence and economic opportunities.

Camp TechKobwa lasted four days and brought together nearly 50 young women from seven schools across Rwanda. The camp included 10 core lessons and two panel discussions, as well as sports, crafts and games. Classes taught the students how to set up an email account and basic programming and blogging, and panel discussions featured Rwandan women who spoke about women in the media and women in technology.

“The purpose of Camp TechKobwa was to provide the students with unhindered access to computers to develop skills and creativity in using technology, as well as to inspire them as the next generation of Rwandan technology entrepreneurs,” said Fujiwara, a graduate of Brown University, in a September 12 Peace Corps news release.

A U.S. Agency for International Development–Peace Corps Small Projects Assistance (SPA) grant allowed the volunteers to invite students to participate in the camp free of charge. The Rwandan Ministry of Youth and Information and Communications Technology also covered transportation costs for students, volunteers and participating panelists.

“Camp TechKobwa focused on empowerment for girls through gaining skills and confidence using computers and media technology,” Fujiwara said. “The camp encouraged young women to become active citizens by building their self-esteem and confidence and empowered them to start computer and media clubs with their information and communication technology teachers upon returning to their schools.”
Before the start of the camp, 14 Rwandan teachers and 13 Peace Corps volunteers went through training and were encouraged to share what they learned with co-workers and counterparts.

In addition to Fujiwara, these Peace Corps volunteers participated in Camp TechKobwa: Ginger Anderson of Durango, Colorado; Michael French, of Tumwater, Washington; Michael Goren of Baltimore; Shawn Grund of Savage, Minnesota; Meredith LaFrance of Tillamook, Oregon; Todd Laudino of Piscataway, New Jersey; Judi Stalter of Fairbanks, Alaska; Elizabeth Stuhr of Ankeny, Iowa; Elisabeth Turner of Elk Grove, California; Zachary Wiberg of Grass Valley, California; Lauren Wright of Columbia, South Carolina; and Claudia Zeiler of San Francisco.

More than 395 Peace Corps volunteers have served in Rwanda since the program was established in 1975, and 161 volunteers are now serving in the country. They work in the areas of health and education. Volunteers are trained and work in Kinyarwanda.

# Peace Corps Volunteer Brings the First Bookmobile to Underserved Communities in Georgia
January 22, 2014
Region: EMA
Post: Georgia
project: Georgia - Bookmobile
excerpt: Bookmobile in Georgia
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20160101160855/http://www.peacecorps.gov/media/forpress/press/2321/

**WASHINGTON, D.C., January 22, 2014** – Peace Corps volunteer Kristen Moses of North Potomac, Md., recently joined U.S. Ambassador to Georgia Richard Norland and local community members to celebrate the launch of the country's first bookmobile, a traveling bus that brings educational programming and resources to underserved communities.

In collaboration with a local non-governmental organization and the U.S. Embassy, Moses worked to expand the embassy's American Corners library project by using an old school bus donated from the United States to create the mobile learning center. The bookmobile has already reached more than 6,000 people across three settlements that are home to families displaced from South Ossetia following conflict in the region in 2008.

"In such isolated communities, any extra attention and after-school activities are a great opportunity for the young people," said Moses, a graduate of Northwestern University. "This year, we hope to expand our reach and bring the bookmobile to more Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) settlements in the region."

The bookmobile spends five days in each community and focuses on youth engagement. The interior of the school bus was gutted and outfitted with bookshelves, beanbag chairs and folding tables to create the feel of a real library. Inside, the bus features books in English for all reading levels, DVDs, laptops with wireless Internet, and a projector and screen, among other resources. All are available free of charge to anyone in the community.

"Kids are able to practice their English skills and learn about American culture, while we also engage them on issues like environmental awareness, healthy lifestyle choices, job skills training, civic engagement and more," Moses said.

The bookmobile project is funded by the U.S. Embassy through [American Corners](http://georgia.usembassy.gov/american-corners-2.html) —a joint partnership project that promotes cooperation and understanding between the United States and Georgia by providing accurate information about the United States. American Corners are small, American-style libraries located within a local partner organization.

A graduate student at American University's School of International Service, Moses is working on a degree in social enterprise through the Peace Corps' [Master's International](https://www.peacecorps.gov/volunteer/university-programs/masters-international/) program. Master's International offers students the unique opportunity to integrate a master's degree with overseas service in a variety of fields at more than 80 academic institutions nationwide.

"Peace Corps has given me the perfect opportunity to get more field experience," Moses said.

# Hacking Away for Fair Farm Prices
February 21, 2014
By Jane Duncan
Region: AF
Post: Kenya
project: Kenya - Farmer Hackathon
excerpt: Addressing market prices for Zambian Farmers
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20151231173158/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2014/02/21/hacking-away-for-fair-farm-prices/

Back in April I received an email requesting creative, humanitarian ideas to improve the everyday lives of Kenyans through technology. Well the Kenyans I hang with on a day-to-day basis are farmers. Not John Deer-ridin', irrigation-pipe-slingin' farmers, but plough-pushin', hand-pickin' folk. I watch these guys and gals work all year long on their seasonal cash crops of mangoes and oranges, which they then turn around and sell at dirt-cheap prices.

During the harvest season farmers typically get less than 5 cents a mango, which doesn't necessarily reflect the fair-market value of the crops they work so hard to cultivate. The amount they get for the less exportable orange may be even less. Figuring out how farmers could get the crops' fair-market value is where "my" idea comes in…

Back in December another PCV told me about a cell phone service that would respond to texted queries about fair market produce prices. Pumped, I texted off several queries of my own but never received a reply. Disappointed, I forgot about the text service until I got the aforementioned email. I asked other PCVs and Kenyans, and not one of them had had any luck with the existing fair-price app.

So I fired off an email proposing a text app that operates with any cell phone (no smart phones in the village my friend, but a surprising number of good old circa 2003 cell phones) that provides fair-price produce information based on the farmer's location. Oh and I didn't stop there. I proposed that it work in English and Kiswahili and be either free or very, very cheap. I sent that puppy off thinking; "that's that, maybe some well-meaning soul will read my 'white lady in the village' idea and make this thing happen." But then another email arrived and I was invited by the Random Hacks of Kindness team to a conference in Nyeri, Kenya.

**Day One**

5:00 pm: Arrive, Nyeri. Meet Anthony, a Dedan Kimathi University student and the Hackathon organizer. Board yet another *matatu* to the campus, which turns out to be gorgeous and even boasts a view of Mount Kenya.

5:40 pm: Anthony shows me to my "quarters," aka his dorm room — he gave up his room for me. Can't say I banked on a college flashback quite this heavy-duty, but the lodging was nice enough.

7:30 pm: Off to the college food pin. Chow down on a plate of rice, lentils and beans, and kick it with some Computer Science Kimathi students.

9:00 pm: Early to bed, early to rise, makes a Peace Corps Volunteer abstinent, boring, and wise.

**Day Two**

6:00 am: Arise. Greet the day. Put on my conference pants and walk on down to the student union.

8:00 am: Conference is supposed to begin, but SURPRISE… you live in Kenya and things are not meant to start on time. So it goes.

9:00 am: Only white person/woman present. Student comes to sit with me and flirt shamelessly.

11:00 am: Conference begins. I am shocked when I realize that the Hackathon is a "lock-in" and we will be in the same room for the **NEXT 30 HOURS. **Must have missed *that *part of the email. Whoops.

12:00 pm: I manage to recruit a team eight fantastic "hackers"/"RHoK Stars"/cool Kenyans. We discuss my app idea over lunch. My initial shock and horror about the 30-hour lock-in and managing a tech team (can I just take a moment to mention I was a History Major?) starts to wear off. There are even two techy ladies on my team, which I love.

**8 HOURS LATER**

8:00 pm: We haven't even bothered to start hacking because we are so in the clear. We have a rock-solid plan — we will use Java (what?) to build a database (yeah uh huh ok) to which farmers can query price info based on county (yeah, that's right) or even upload their own produce price info (awesome). This application will work with any cell phone. After drafting a plan of action we kick it for a bit. Why work when you can focus on new friends!?

10:00 pm: The ladies and I convene and christen ourselves team "*Lipwa Poa*," the cool way to check fair market prices. A legend is born.

**Day Three**

2:00 am: Dehydration is setting in. Apparently Kenyans can survive solely on *ugali* (corn paste) and tea.

6:00 am: As the sun rises we work out all the kinks. Our logo is complete and looking fab. Our Prezi presentation is all animated and motion-sickness-inducing and perfect. The Java database (what?) is fully functional, both replying to queries and uploading information. Let the games begin.

11:00 am: We present the Lipwa Poa application, and in my mind we are clearly the best, most humanitarian, most awesome team. We take second in the Nyeri Hackathon to a smart phone application that helps Kenyan with cars find parking in Nairobi. I hide my disappointment poorly, but take comfort in the fact that I have eight new friends. Cheesy, but true.



# Ine? Aphunsitza? Aye... Course One
March 4, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
project: Zambia - Computer Course
excerpt: Delivering computer training course for Zambia students
Source: https://smeintsma.wordpress.com/2015/07/25/ine-aphunsitza-ayi-cittc-course-one/

A whole computer course has come and is now gone from my CITTC (Chiparamba Information Technology Training Center) experience…I figured now is probably a good time to re-hash what exactly it's been like…

First things first, I have zero experience teaching, and, in fact, I choose to serve in the Peace Corps over other programs like WorldTeach, precisely because I did not want to teach and (correctly) guessed that I probably wouldn't enjoy it much. Don't get me wrong, teaching is a noble profession–most of my family are teachers, but it’s not an easy job. Especially when you're teaching students who are 1. Not fluent in English, 2. Completely technologically illiterate, and 3. Have only known Zambia's prodigious education system (hint: sarcasm). I honestly don't know how RED (Rural Education Development) volunteers do it. Their job day in and day out is to teach in Zambia's derelict education system at schools that are usually lacking every resource imaginable (paper, pens, projectors, computers, food, you name it). I doubt I'd make it through 2 years of that… At least I have an excuse for when my headmaster asks me if I want to teach. ..."sorry, not in my job description." I mean, yes, a part of my job is to teach skills to rural people–but not 8th grade biology or 9th grade computer science.

> So, I started teaching the Introduction to Computers course for youths at CITTC in my second week of community entry (which is now over!). The final exam was this past Wednesday. I was so ready for the course to be over….let me give you an example of a typical class….

Class starts at 16:00… There are usually 1 or 2 students here at that time and most of them arrive around 16:30–missing most of the lesson. I stand at the front of the classroom while the students sit at the computers or in benches near the laptops (often there is no power, so at least they are not distracted by the computer screens–small victory?) I give the lesson, which, to me, seems extremely simplistic and fairly logical/obvious (i.e. How to set up your computer: plug the monitor into the computer and the computer into the wall…). But even this is complex for my students. They're not stupid–they just have literally ZERO experience with computers–only recently has my community had access to any electrical power of any kind–what do you expect? But it’s SO hard to properly digest this–I've been using computers since I was three years old, how do I check my assumptions with their lack of experience? Let me tell you–it's nearly impossible. Everything has to be simplified to an extent that I find to be nearly absurd. Thus is mostly due to the fact that their English vocab is limited, so when I say "your computer can be infected with a virus that will make it unable to operate correctly," I have to clarify if my students know what the words "infected," "virus," and "operate” mean. On top of this, when I ask them for feedback–"do you know what a virus is?" they stare blankly back at me, not even offering a response. What do I do with that? Will they think I'm belittling them if I define it? Or if I don’t?

Further complicating the entry procedure is my students experience with learning. Now, I haven't personally experienced a Zambian school classroom, but from what I understand, there is little to no critical thinking. Teachers typically come to class, write notes on a board and leave the class while the students copy the notes (precisely) and then return at the end of class with little to no discussion taking place. So, when I ask for feedback, they simply don’t understand what I'm asking for. And they are afraid to tell me they don’t understand because they want me to feel good about my ability to teach. This, in fact, makes me feel worse.

So it got to the point where I would teach the material, off of the flip chart and they'd copy the notes but not understand any of the material because they weren't actually processing the information, but just copying it. So eventually I talked with the two men that run CITTC (Mr. Mutale and Mr. Mwenza) asking for help since clearly my understanding of learning is very different than theirs. Lucky for me, I was able to work with a University student on leave from Lusaka for the past month or so who has experience both with computers and with teaching. So we ended up splitting the classes every other day and sitting in on one another’s classes as well to learn from one another. Paul was very helpful and gave me some good pointers on how to approach the students. Mostly he affirmed that really my English isn't that hard to understand, it's just that they don't know enough English to understand it (even Mr. Mwenza and Mr. Mutale have said my accent is very clear and easy to understand). He basically just repeatedly told me (Zambians have a tendency to talk in circles) that these students need every detail described or explained to them and that I just need to repeat myself 3 or 4 times before moving from one subject to the next. And to make sure they understand what I mean by using this word…to try to relate it back to what they know. So that's what we did. I could tell near the end of the course that they were retaining more information–I'm not sure if this was because of me, Paul, them, or a combination, but…although I may be jumping the gun in saying this (as exam results are not in yet), all’s well that ends well, right?

Really, it would work much better if I could just teach in ChiCiewa, *koma, yamvuto maningi. *The hardest part for me remains in attempting to simplify things that I find to be already extremely simplistic (e.g. plugging in your computer).

> Still, I am hesitant to volunteer my time again as a teacher at CITTC. Unfortunately, they are extremely short staffed, as Mr. Mwenza is back in theology school and Paul went back to University. So it's just Mr. Mutale and 1 or 2 older adult students that are in advanced classes and teach the introductory courses. But I'll be much busier now that I'm allowed to work (post-community entry) and I'll be in and out of the village much more often. So I'm not sure what will happen when I get back in September. While I don't particularly want to teach, I do want to see CITTC thrive…and those two goals may not be mutually exclusive. I'll keep you updated!

# Blogging Off the Grid
March 9, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
project: Zambia - Offline Blogging
excerpt: Blogging without the Internet in Zambia
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/blogging-off-the-grid/

I live in a mud hut in sub-Saharan Africa with no electricity or running water. So how do I blog from my site? With a smartphone, solar panels and thumbs destined for carpal tunnel syndrome, that's how.

The first and biggest obstacle to blogging in Zambia is finding electricity. The vast majority of Peace Corps Zambia Volunteers live in rural areas with little or no power infrastructure and I'm no exception, so to circumvent this problem I have a Joos Orange portable solar panel and two Greenlight Planet Sunking Pro solar lamps. The solar panels for the lamps are tied to the top of my hut and the cords are threaded through the thatched grass roof, powering the lights, which serve double duty as phone chargers. A full day of sunlight yields enough electricity to charge my phone, headlamp and e-book reader while also supplying me with light throughout the evening.

My smartphone is "smart" because it can access the internet and run programs. Using the WordPress app, I can manage posts, edit drafts and respond to comments. I type using the phone's touchscreen keyboard and save notes for potential blog posts as drafts to access later whenever an idea strikes, whether I'm standing at the edge of a fish farmer's pond or wading through a crowded market. At present, I have 42 draft posts in various stages of completion, including a handful that are ready to publish and which I keep on contingency in case I run low on ideas one week.

Once I finish writing a post, the next step is to add pictures. Most of the photographs I post on my blog are taken with the camera on my phone, but about once a month I travel to the Peace Corps provincial house 215 kilometers south of my site where I am able to retrieve pictures I've taken with my digital camera by transferring them to my laptop.

Last but not least is publishing the blog post. I purchase a monthly 3G data plan for my phone through a local Zambian cellular service provider, which allows me to access internet at my site. It works about 75 percent of the time, so I write and edit my posts offline and then publish them when I manage to catch the network at a good hour. There is intermittent Wi-Fi at the provincial house, but if it's not working when I visit – not an unlikely scenario, as it was on the fritz for six months earlier this year – then I use Bluetooth to transfer pictures from my laptop back to my phone.

Daily life in the Peace Corps often requires forgoing many of the modern amenities and technology that we take for granted in America. However, this Volunteer is happy to use any tools available in order to help promote Peace Corps' third goal.

# Jordan Blekking - Zambia slowly joining technology boom
March 9, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
project: Zambia - Various Technologies
excerpt: Various technologies used by Volunteers in Zambia
Source: http://www.coloradoan.com/story/news/2014/03/09/jordan-blekking-zambia-slowly-joining-technology-boom/6242487/

Technology is crazy. It’s constantly improving, changing, shifting and doing things for us that we wouldn’t have imagined 10 or 20 years ago — maybe even five years ago.

I’m constantly at a loss when trying to understand why things are getting smaller, what a hash tag is doing in front of a person’s name or how people manage to keep up with any of this. It took me a week just to understand what a “selfie” was.

It doesn’t matter what I can’t keep up with, especially when I’m trying to keep up with it while living in a Zambian village, because even my village is changing.

With more than one billion people, Africa represents a large portion of the market available to technology manufacturers and companies like Samsung and General Electric.

It’s in this area of cell phones that I notice the largest growth in technology adoption. Nearly every person has a cell phone and nearly every street corner is staffed with peddlers trying to sell a newer, better model.

These phones often provide villagers with Internet access, and although the uptake of this crazy notion called the World Wide Web is slow, it is gaining. It’s only a matter of time until my villagers start asking for my email address and we’ll be able to stay in touch long after I’ve left for the U.S.

Though the phones here aren’t as nice as those back home, some aid groups are trying to use phones to improve people’s lives.

For instance, there’s a texting service that rural, small-scale farmers can use to find the price of certain commodity crops like soybeans, corn and beans on the world market. The service will even identify companies that are buying these crops and provide the company’s contact information.

The Peace Corps in Zambia is also getting into the technology game through its partnership with a local technology hub called the Bongo Hive.

Last year this partnership created a cell phone application called Bantu Babel, which helps translate many of the local languages into English.

Twice a year, volunteers team up with local tech enthusiasts during a “hackathon” to brainstorm and create new development-focused applications and programs. Next up from the Bongo Hive group is a transportation-inspired application.

There has also been startling growth in the use of solar panels throughout my community’s villages. Where there were no lights nearly two years ago, and only the occasional candle, there are now families using solar panels to charge not only their cell phones but to power light bulbs in their huts.

As an American abroad, the growth of technology in Africa has been great. I have a cell phone that lets me text and call the United States — for a small fortune — check my email and Facebook accounts daily and I’ve even started a Twitter account from my hut based on all the things my favorite villager, Mr. Nshimbi, has said to me throughout my service. These newspaper articles are products of Zambia’s growing connectivity.

A fellow volunteer, Caleb Rudow, has greatly surpassed my own use of technology to stay connected by creating something that I affectionately call the “war room” in his hut.

He has an entire solar system for his computer to use and through that he can Skype with his family in the United States — right from his hut. I always know when Caleb is in the war room because I’ll get email after email from him in regard to projects I’m connected to, projects that may interest me or just friendly emails to check in.

In the future I see technology’s use only growing throughout rural communities, especially in the area of public health.

Mobile health clinics are becoming more popular in the rural areas because technology has allowed these clinics to feature smaller, more easily transportable machines for checking a person’s vital health (HIV status, blood tests, respiratory, etc.) in the less accessible areas of Zambia.

Text messaging services will play a greater role, for example a mother could receive a text reminder for when her child is due for a vaccination or what dietary needs the mother should meet while cooking dinner.

Ultimately, the spread of technology to villagers will only increase their connectivity and access to news, knowledge and information.

What slowed them before, inability to access information, is slowly being chipped away at, allowing those wanting the information to have access to the world’s databases — essentially connecting us all and making life a little easier.

# Camp Sky 2015 - A Click in the Computer Literacy Direction
April 8, 2014
By Devyn Lee
Region: AF
Post: Malawi
project: Malawi - Camp Sky
excerpt: Post specifically on computer education on Malawi tech camp
Source: http://campskymw2015.blogspot.com/2015/04/a-click-in-computer-literacy-direction.html

Think for a minute about how you operated your computer in order to read this blog: you turned it on, logged in, opened a browser, and typed in the web address. Along the way, you used the mouse or trackpad to point and click, and you successfully used the keyboard to type the characters of the URL. These are simple tasks for most computer users, and you probably went through the steps without a thought. Americans have been using computers for years, learning at a young age (at least for my generation). We have performed thousands of typing and mouse actions, and these skills have become second nature to us.

This week at Camp Sky, I was given the job of teaching computer lessons to our student campers. Using a basic computer literacy lesson plan written by coordinator Madam Susan Stancampiano, fellow counselor Madam Alex Martin and I instructed one of the computer labs at Kamuzu Academy. Each student bird team received two computer lessons, offering many their first opportunity ever to touch or to use a computer.

So, how exactly does one teach a group of teenagers how to use a computer for the first time? The answer: very slowly, with lots of patience, and with several other volunteers in the room to provide assistance. Our first lesson began explaining the parts of the computer: the monitor, the CPU, the mouse, the keyboard, etc. (We logged into the computers before the students arrived, figuring that the Ctrl + Alt + Delete command might be a little too complex for first-time users.) Next, we demonstrated how to use the mouse, discussed the different types of mouse clicks, and taught the students how to click and drag. I'm willing to bet that you have never seen a group of students so excited over opening and closing the recycling bin window and right clicking on an empty desktop.

After the students had some practice clicking, we had them open Microsoft Word and try their hand at typing. They practiced typing the alphabet in order, using the backspace key and space bar, and typing some numbers. We then showed the students how to change the font, size, and color of their text. That's where the real fun began – most campers chose to continue typing in 72 point, brightly colored text. We divulged the correct number of spaces to use between words and after punctuation, and we also tried to distinguish the shift key from the caps lock key. By the end of the first lesson, most students had typed out a few sentences on their own, and they were all mystified to see their own words appear on the computer screen.

During the second lesson, the students were able to practice these new skills again, as they typed part of their English class compositions. We taught the basic format for a school paper: putting name and date in the upper right hand corner, making the title bold and aligning it in the center, and using the tab key to indent the first line of the paragraph. Students were also able to print one page of their work, to take home and to prove their new computer skills to friends and family. Needless to say, this cheap piece of paper is worth much more to them.

The students also briefly browsed the Internet and caught their first glimpse of the world wide web. They were tasked with entering the Camp Sky blog address in the address box and finding themselves in post pictures. Some savvy students were assisted in creating their first email accounts. We cannot wait to see how this new found computer interest will motivate students to seek further computer training and technological information.

Teaching the computer lessons was both exhausting and incredibly rewarding. Though we were prepared with a lesson plan, teaching first-time users forces a lot of additions and changes on the fly. I was impressed by how quickly many of the students learned, and also surprised at the wide range of skills they displayed as computer amateurs. Some showed impressively quick typing skills, while others were typists of the hunt and peck variety. Regardless of skill level, all of the students cherished the lessons.

Our use of technology is something that we very often take for granted, especially in the United States or other developed nations. How many of our schools in the US now rely heavily on classroom laptops, smart podiums, and online homework assignments? For many of the CDSS students at Camp Sky, technology has thus far played a negligible role in their education. Their schools are lucky to have electricity, much less computers that are available for student use. The opportunity for students to have at least a small amount of computer training is just one of the ways that Camp Sky offers the students inspiration and extra preparation for them to continue their education after secondary school.

# Civil Society Organizations Meeting & Mapping Dowa District
April 8, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Malawi
project: Malawi - Mapping Project
excerpt: Mapping project by Malawi PCVs
Source: https://agalternativesmalawi.wordpress.com/2014/04/08/civil-society-organizations-meeting-mapping-dowa-district/

Last month, The Kusamala Institute of Agriculture and Ecology hosted a workshop in Mponela, a trading center in Dowa District. As part of Kusamala's Climate Smart Agriculture Project, the workshop brought together leaders of civil society organizations and government agencies that are working in Dowa District. In recent decades, Dowa has been home to an abundance of development projects, aid organizations, charities, etc. However, the efforts of these groups are rarely coordinated, and new projects might even be started without the knowledge of existing projects already working on the same issues in the same area. Not only is this trend a waste of resources, it is unfair to the population of Dowa, who are the recipients of poorly planned, disjointed projects and programs.

At Kusamala begins its two-year Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) project, whereby Kusamala aims to train 1500 Dowa farmers in CSA strategies and practices, the organization is committed to coordinating their efforts with others working on the ground in Dowa. Accordingly, Kusamala proposed this workshop, the first of several, to achieve a number of objectives:

- Identify blocks and find common ground between representatives of civil society organizations working within the sectors of:
	- Food and nutrition security
	- Sustainable agriculture
	- Environmental resilience and climate change
- Share tools and best practices with the goal of creating a shared measurement system on what is working and what is not.
- Establish a living network of stakeholders in the relevant sectors with a clear commitment to improve communication, advocacy and large-scale impact.

We, the Kusamala Mapping Team, helped to facilitate the two-day meeting with… you guessed it… maps!

In effort to better understand who is working where, and on what, in Dowa, we distributed maps of Dowa to the workshop's participants and asked them to plot their catchment areas and describe their activities there. Our goal was to identify areas of overlap and potential collaboration, as well as the areas where projects are not reaching, which might indicate areas for future work. The participants, representing diverse stakeholders ranging from the Ministry of Agriculture to the U.S. Peace Corps to WorldVision, provided some enlightening results.

We presented our findings on the second day of the workshop and discussed how GIS and maps could be used for monitoring and evaluating projects at a district level. Our presentation was well received, and the workshop collectively decided to pursue GIS as a tool to increase collaboration and understanding of development goals throughout Dowa District. We kept the ball rolling by digitizing each of the organizations' catchment areas and performing an overlap analysis in ArcGIS. Digital maps were distributed after the workshop and the feedback from the participants has been great.

Stay tuned as we continue to work with this network of civil society organizations and use GIS to further their missions to enhance environmental, economic, and social well-being in the Dowa District, Malawi.



# Peace Corps Helps Ghana Cashew Farmers Use Mobile Technology
May 20, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Ghana
project: Ghana - Cashew Initiative
excerpt: PCV-assisted cashew initiative with GIS
Source: http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/article/2014/05/20140522299557.html#axzz3lolw9f9i

**Washington** — Peace Corps volunteer Michael Underwood of Pineville, Kentucky, is helping cashew farmers in his Ghana community use mobile technology to boost production and improve their business. Giving local farmers the tools to map their farms and better track sales of cashews enables them to identify operational efficiencies and ensure fair prices.

In his community in Ghana, Underwood walks with farmers along the perimeter of their land with a GPS device to calculate its acreage and develop a satellite image of the farm.

"Knowing the acreage is extremely important, as it is how farmers calculate how much pesticide and other chemicals they use," Underwood said. "Most farmers I've worked with either don't know or guess how many acres they own, which causes over spraying of harmful chemicals."

Underwood has also collaborated with a German software company to develop and pilot mobile software that tracks the origin, quality and prices of cashews from various communities — benefitting both the farmers and cashew buyers. With greater transparency across the industry, farmers can charge more for higher-quality cashews, and buyers can have greater confidence in the value of their purchase. Underwood's work has included programing cellphones and training buyers to use them, as well as providing technical information about the cashew industry and testing the application.

To reduce food waste across the cashew industry, Underwood's fellow Peace Corps volunteers are encouraging local community members to process the cashew apple from the cashew tree, which was previously discarded. Volunteers have formed women's groups that are producing juice and jam from the apples and generating extra income for their families.

"By finding ways to use the cashew fruit, volunteers are cutting down on food waste and introducing an easily accessible and nutritious food," Underwood said. "In addition, the increased income from the sale of the fruit products, the premiums from selling higher-quality cashew nuts, and money saved by working in farmer groups has aided in creating greater food security and allowing more people access to foods with higher nutrient values."

Underwood is one of more than 1,265 Peace Corps volunteers bringing important food security messages and practices to the grass-roots level through the Feed the Future program. The Peace Corps is one of 10 federal departments and agencies contributing to the Feed the Future Initiative.

There are currently 143 volunteers in Ghana working in the areas of education, agriculture and health. During their service in Ghana, volunteers learn to speak the local languages, including Buli, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ewe, Fanté, Ga, Ghanaian Sign Language, Gonja, Guruni, Hausa, Kasem, Kusaal, Likipakpaalu, Likpakpaln, Mampruli, Nzema, Sisaali, Taleni, Twi and Waale. More than 4,360 Peace Corps volunteers have served in Ghana since the program was established in 1961.



# Peace Corps Volunteers Find Innovative Solutions to Global Health Challenges
June 28, 2014
Region: IAP
Post: Nicaragua
project: Nicaragua - Chat Salud
excerpt: Peace Corps press on health messaging app in Nicaragua.
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20160101160855/http://www.peacecorps.gov/media/forpress/press/2360/

**WASHINGTON, D.C., April 7, 2014** – In honor of World Health Day, the Peace Corps celebrates the work of volunteers around the world to improve global health in collaboration with the countries and communities they serve.

World Health Day is celebrated annually on April 7 to commemorate the establishment of the World Health Organization in 1948 and bring worldwide attention to public health issues.

To empower Nicaraguans to lead healthier, safer lives, returned Peace Corps volunteer Lauren Spigel and current Peace Corps volunteer Nishant Kishore, together with fellow volunteers and community members, have created a text-message based health hotline called ChatSalud to anonymously share accurate health information and connect Nicaraguans to local health resources.

An unwillingness to talk openly about sexual and reproductive health in Nicaragua has led to a widespread lack of reliable information for young people and high rates of pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS. The topic is considered taboo, and as a result, about one in every four adolescent girls in Nicaragua will become pregnant before they turn 18, and only about 60 percent of the rural population engages in family planning.

"In the small community where I was living and working, youth often faced barriers when accessing sexual and reproductive health information," said Spigel, of Baltimore, Md. "In doing our work as Peace Corps volunteers, we found that people want information about sexual and reproductive health, but they want a way to get it anonymously."

Spigel and her colleagues found that while less than 10 percent of households in Nicaragua had access to the Internet, nearly 90 percent of the population had access to a cell phone. The volunteers' mobile solution is filling an important gap by making sexual and reproductive health information accessible in a reliable and confidential way that resonates with Nicaraguan youth.


The free text hotline will be the first of its kind in the country and will work to break down the stigma associated with talking about sexual and reproductive health in Nicaraguan culture. The ChatSalud team has brought together significant resources and local organizations, including the Nicaraguan government, to get the program off the ground. With the help of local telecommunications companies, the text message service will be completely free for users.

"ChatSalud is showing that Peace Corps volunteers can mobilize coordinated efforts between partners at the grassroots and national levels," Spigel said.

Youth from the program's pilot community in rural Northern Nicaragua are already proving the impact of the project, and in the months ahead, ChatSalud hopes to expand across the country.

"Really, this is what the modern Peace Corps is all about," Spigel said. "With ChatSalud, we identified a problem at the grassroots level and had the flexibility, perseverance and technological know-how to innovate a solution."



# 200 Mile Bicycle Ride Fundraiser for Computer Lab
July 13, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - Computer Lab Bike Ride
excerpt: Raising money for a computer lab in Uganda
Source: https://mountainsbeyondmountainsuganda.wordpress.com/200-mile-bicycle-ride-fundraiser-for-computer-lab/

Hello Everyone,

Just in time for the holiday season I am biking all the way from my village of Luteete near Luweero to Fort Portal over the course of a week starting on December 16, 2014. With my fellow PCV friend Ravi Sahai and my Ugandan neighbor Kato Godfrey we will bike to Fort Portal in the western region of Uganda in order to raise money **for the construction of a computer Lab** in my village school of Luteete PTC. The entire distance traveled will be 200 miles (321km).

I ask that you pledge anywhere from 5 cents to $1 for every km traveled. Or maybe you would rather make a one-time donation to the cause. I ask that instead of a care package, Christmas gift, or Birthday gift that you support me in this cause that I so passionately believe in. Just go to:

<https://donate.peacecorps.gov/index.cfm?shell=donate.contribute.projDetail&projdesc=14-617-059>

or search Roxas at <http://www.peacecorps.gov/donate>

**[Appeal Video][https://www.youtube.com/embed/jRcEACPeNA]:**



# Illinois Wesleyan helps fund Ugandan computer lab
July 13, 2014
By Teresa Sherman
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - Computer Lab
excerpt: Uganda computer lab development
Source: https://www.iwu.edu/magazine/2009/winter/peace*corps.html

On the day of her final farewell to the Ugandan village — and to the people who had become her family — Sarah Cowan paused in front of the inauspicious concrete building that stood as testament to more than two years of service. Behind the squat, gray-and-white walls and colorfully painted world map around the door sits a collection of more than 6,000 books, their glossy covers smudged by the fingerprints of dozens of children.

Before Cowan, a 2005 Illinois Wesleyan graduate in music education, came to the small village of Ssanje in April 2006, there wasn't a library in the entire Rakai district in south-central Uganda, an area covering almost 2,000 square miles.

In Ssanje, Cowan was assigned to a school funded by Children of Uganda, a non-profit group created to help some of the nearly 2.4 million children in the country who have lost one or both parents to HIV/AIDS, extreme poverty or civil conflict. Though the remote location does not have electricity or running water, Cowan soon learned that the teachers and leaders of Ssanje had a vision for their village's future.

"When they approached me with the idea for a community center, I jumped at the idea," says Cowan. "I had learned already that, for development to be maintained, it has to come from the people."

Cowan connected the Ssanje villagers with people from her life back home — family and friends, fellow Illinois Wesleyan graduates and the Peace Corps support network — and raised $12,000 needed to build the library.

When Cowan's time as a Peace Corps Volunteer (PCV) came to a close in November 2008, Ssanje attained solar power, a few computers and Internet access, as well as a book catalogue in the thousands.

Cowan's sense of tangible accomplishment is the dream of thousands of Peace Corps volunteers and applicants who have responded to the call to serve since the program's creation in 1961. That call is being heard louder than ever: this year, the Peace Corps received its largest-ever recorded number of applicants. The majority of those are recent college graduates.

One of those applicants is Emily Franzen, an education major nominated to serve in French-speaking West Africa after her December 2009 graduation. As she anticipates the radical changes to which she will need to adapt as a PCV, Franzen is also trying to stay grounded in her expectations. "If I'm able to help just one classroom of students improve their English language skills," she says, "I know the two years away from home will be time well spent."

Still, Franzen doesn't pretend to know what her service might be like. Indeed, every volunteer experience is different, as Illinois Wesleyan's long list of alumni-PCVs can attest.

In the past 10 years alone, dozens of IWU graduates have gone on to serve in Peace Corps posts from Azerbaijan to Paraguay, from Northern to Sub-Saharan Africa. For some, the experience was everything they'd hoped for; others left with feelings of frustration at all that was left unaccomplished. For most, the experience has involved adjusting to the realization that change is often difficult, and can take far longer than the span of their two-year service.

## . . .

"Time is fluid here, which makes sense considering the 130-degree heat," observes 2007 alumna Marisa Van Osdale, a health-education volunteer in Senegal at the tail-end of her service.

Van Osdale remains enthusiastic about her time in Goudoude Diobe — a village of 500 that lies four miles from a paved road — and she enjoys its stark contrast with her former life in Illinois. "I take a horse cart in and out of the village once a week to go into the city for market and Internet access," says Van Osdale, who has no running water or electricity in her concrete house.

Van Osdale knows she is still very privileged in comparison to those she serves. "Life here is hard for the people not receiving care packages from friends and family." Hunger is a very real problem, she says, citing the skyrocketing price of rice and a particularly bad rainy season. Poor water sanitation and related diseases such as dysentery and malaria are threats year-round.

Prior to arriving in Senegal, the closest thing Van Osdale had seen to the level of poverty in Goudoude Diobe was during a May Term trip to South Africa. But, she admits, "By no means was I prepared."

Despite its austere way of life, Osdale describes her village as a place "filled with laughter, jokes, smiles and squeals of delight from children playing games."

Like Cowan, Van Osdale measures her success by keeping a number of short-term goals. Since her arrival, she has worked closely with teachers at the local primary school and at a middle school in the nearby village of Thilogne. Unlike Uganda, education is free in Senegal up to age 16. Government stipends go toward school supplies, clothing and even housing costs for children who live too far away for daily travel.

"Girls' education is at the forefront of every new development push," adds Van Osdale. In Senegal, only 15 percent of girls are able to go to secondary school. Yet those who have been educated tend to have fewer and healthier babies later in life, take more active roles in their communities and are better able to protect themselves against HIV/AIDS and other diseases.

Each year, Peace Corps Senegal awards scholarships to female middle-school students to continue their studies. Last year, there was enough money to distribute two scholarships to a pair of children whom Van Osdale taught at the Thilogne middle school. "Both girls had radiant smiles when I gave them their scholarships," she says. The girls plan to continue their schooling through college at the University of Dakar in Senegal's capital.

In the few months that remain in Van Osdale's assignment, she says she looks forward to continuing her work with the girls at the middle school, teaching primary school children about basic sanitation, planting trees in the village and "letting people know a little bit about real American culture."

Though Van Osdale does miss her family and friends in the U.S., nothing can douse the spirit of adventure that she wakes up to every morning, even on days when she gets frustrated with the cows mooing at 5 a.m. "Interacting with the kids, talking about resting and eating right with pregnant mothers and drinking traditional tea with the villagers makes it all worthwhile," she says.

## . . .

Because of the length, difficulty and low financial reward for their service, the question "Will it be worth it?" often weighs heavily on the minds of potential Peace Corp volunteers.

Hearing about the successes of volunteers like Cowan and Van Osdale is reassuring to nominees like Franzen. But nagging doubts remain.

"As excited as I am about what I can accomplish as a teaching volunteer, it's daunting to think of how limited the resources are going to be," says Franzen. "I've taught in classrooms with 'Smart Board' technology," she adds, referring to a popular interactive, electronic whiteboard. "I know Peace Corps is going to be a major wake-up call."

That wake-up call sounded loud and clear to Allison Bannerman '07. The political science major studied international issues while at IWU and planned to further her education in law and international studies after her Peace Corps tour.

"I had my life pretty well mapped out when I graduated, and Peace Corps was a natural fit — or at least that's what I thought at the time," says Bannerman.

In the fall of 2007, Bannerman started in-country training for the Peace Corps in the Central Asian country of Kazakhstan. Five months later, she was back in her hometown of Bainbridge Island, Wash.

Currently a law student at Washington University, she doesn't regret her decision to terminate her Peace Corps service early.

"Every assignment is different, and I realized almost immediately that mine wouldn't allow me to fulfill any of the reasons I wanted to join," she says.

According to Bannerman, none of the programs she wanted to implement were possible and the ones in place had deficiencies too steep to overcome.

"The tools I had available to me were not the tools I needed to meet my goals," she says. "I wasn't the right person for the job and the job wasn't the right one for me. That realization was the final straw that made me leave."

Resigning in the winter of 2008, Bannerman became one of an estimated 30 percent of volunteers who choose not to complete their service each year. Still, Bannerman cites many reasons why her shortened experience was worthwhile. She still keeps in touch with friends she made through the Peace Corps and returned to Kazakhstan this summer to visit.

Most importantly, she says, "It taught me to be true to myself and the causes that I'm most passionate about. Peace Corps isn't a feel-good vacation. As a volunteer, you have a responsibility to serve your community to the best of your abilities. If you can't offer that, you owe it to them and to yourself to rethink your commitment."

## . . .

Ryan Smith didn't join the Peace Corps expecting to change the world.

"My service was a tiny, two year slice of a giant, 50-year development experiment," says Smith, who worked in Gambia to promote sustainable community development and environmental conservation.

"When I lost sight of the big picture, I started feeling like I was just banging my head against a wall."

Smith's wife and fellow 2007 IWU graduate Leslie Coleman experienced similar feelings as a Peace Corps volunteer working with the ecotourism and research units of Gambia's Department of Parks and Wildlife Management. Every day, she says, was a balancing act between succeeding on a "small-scale" and questioning her impact.

"Misuse of project funds was something that I was able to stop by speaking with my supervisors," Coleman says. "But, now that I'm gone, I don't really have any doubt that the corruption has resumed."

Still, thanks to what Coleman describes as the passion, intelligence and dedication of several Gambian coworkers, most of her projects reached fruition — though her assignment was aborted early due to a medical condition Ryan suffered that could not be treated in Gambia.

Smith is healthy now, and he and Coleman are back to work as English teachers in Thailand.

Though proud of her PC service, Coleman admits that the experience made her less inclined to pursue a career in international development.

"Every day I was faced with cultural differences — a lack of environmental concern, non-democratic ideals and the inferior position of women — that seemed to me to run too deep to change," she says. "As an outsider, I felt my capacity to address them was limited."

Coleman says she was sometimes not taken as seriously at work as her husband, while their Western gender roles often drew sharp comments from their neighbors.

"Some people thought I wasn't a good wife because my husband helped cook, clean and sweep the front porch. That's something that the older generation will probably never understand," she says. "But when we heard it from young men, we just joked with them about how they needed to learn to do the same, or else no young woman would want to marry them."

Coleman also recalls the weekly club for students that she and Ryan hosted where conversations on social and environmental issues revealed how much Americans and Gambians shared core cultural values.

"I learned so much from my students, just seeing the challenges they face growing up as young Gambians," says Coleman. "They made me think critically about many of the assumptions I came here with."

Looking back, Smith regards his initial reasons for joining the Peace Corps as fairly selfish. "I wanted the challenge," he says. "I wanted to learn a new language. I wanted to see if I could go two years without the amenities we're so used to. I wanted this experience to make me a better person."

Ultimately, what changed Smith was a lesson in selflessness.

"Many of the Gambians we lived with seemed to be of the mindset that they're all but ignored by the rest of the world," he says. "But PCVs put their American lives to work side by side with them in the fields. They eat out of the same bowl as local families. I think that says to them, 'You're the ones who matter.'"

## . . .

When the final countdown to Cowan's departure from Uganda began, the people of Ssanje held multiple parties and dances in her honor.

"They kept thanking me for everything I'd done for them," she recalls, "but I couldn't make them realize that I was the one who should be grateful for all they had done for me."

In her role as a music teacher in elementary schools in the Chicago suburbs, Cowan presents pictures, stories and videos from her time in Uganda. Her stories inspire students and fellow teachers to send books, school supplies and encouraging letters to the children of Ssanje.

Likewise, Cowan says that fellow PCVs who have also returned home continue to offer friendship and support. "It's really an experience that everyone involved carries with them for a lifetime."

Illinois Wesleyan PCVs make it a special point to keep in touch, Coleman adds. "The class of 2007 is really active." During her time in Gambia, she and Smith met up with alumnae like Van Osdale and Jessica Scates in Senegal for a PCV softball tournament. "It was really enlightening to compare our experiences," says Coleman.

According to Franzen, even those just considering joining are invited into the PC alumni community. "I've gotten to talk with so many volunteers, most of them IWU alums. They've all shared really great advice," Nevertheless, Franzen has a difficult time imagining life as a Peace Corps volunteer in Africa. "I have this image of myself standing on the porch of a thatched hut, looking out into the jungle and thinking, 'What the hell am I doing here?'" she says.

The idea is both terrifying and thrilling to Franzen, who looks forward to experiencing what she describes as the "Peace Corps dualities" — teaching and being taught, wrestling with prejudice and facing her own, failing miserably and succeeding wildly.



# Girls acquire ICT skills to Solve Community Problems
August 9, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: Rwandan news account of Camp TechKobwa
Source: http://www.newtimes.co.rw/section/article/2014-08-09/92373/

Sixty female students from twelve secondary schools across the country have been trained in basic computer skills, photography, digital media, programming, and research methods.

The seven-day training that kicked off last week at the Northern Province's Groupe Scolaire Janja in Gakenke District was dubbed Camp TechKobwa, to reflect its focus on women as Kobwa means female in Kinyarwanda.

The course was sponsored by American Peace Corps, Michigan State University, and IBM with the support and technological expertise of local partners ELE Rwanda, Girls in ICT and K-lab.

Elizabeth Turner, the course Director, said that the girls acquired skills on how to solve problems in their communities using Information and Communication Technology (ICT).

"They had the chance to experience building and utilizing robotics. We also encouraged them in regards to self-confidence, goal setting, and self-expression so that they can be role models and leaders in their communities," Turner explained.

ICT Teachers from selected schools underwent a four-day training of trainer's course.

"The teachers that attained the training will be able to pass on skills to more students in their respective schools thus we are able to reach more students that were not able to come for the camp," Turner said.

Organizers of TechKobwa Camp said its aim was to expose Rwandan girls to technology that encourages them to explore, engage, and consider future careers in ICT.

Giselle Izerimana, 16, a senior- four student at Ecole Secondaire Mulindi in Northern Province's Gicumbi District said that she attained skills in internet security.

"My dream career is to become an Astronaut. It has been my dream from when I was 12 years old. And as a future Astronaut, this training was important. This training has equipped me with various skills and ICT became more and more interesting. Besides learning about internet security, I was able to get skills in public speaking," Izerimana said.

Just like Izerimana, the 19-year-old Marceline Maniraguha who is a senior six student at Groupe Scolaire Murunda, enjoyed the course.

"Although I was able to learn about some ICT applications that can help in solving problems in our community, I learnt that if I have goals and dreams, I need to note them down, set objectives on how to achieve them and then I can work towards achieving them," Maniraguha said.



# Ghana adds Modern Twist to Stomp Out Malaria
September 26, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Ghana
project: Ghana - Hackathon
excerpt: Hackathon in Ghana focusing on malaria education activities
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/ghana-adds-modern-twist-to-stomp-out-malaria/

For Peace Corps Volunteers (PCVs), the rate at which we are required to adapt to new situations with creativity and flexibility can at times be overwhelming.

The limited stay in our host countries, combined with the speed at which the international community is developing alongside our villages, builds pressure for action. Developments in technology and easier access to various mobile devices have set the stage for a dramatic shift in the way PCVs work with their host countries to disseminate valuable, life-saving information, and one of the greatest beneficiaries of these advances is the fight to end malaria.

With nearly 3.5 million reported cases annually, malaria remains the number one killer in Ghana. Roughly one-third of all reported cases in Ghana are among children under the age of 5. This equates to nearly seven newly diagnosed cases of malaria every minute and almost 40 deaths of children under the age of 5 every day.

In an effort to optimize resources, Peace Corps Ghana's Standing with Africa to Terminate (SWAT) Malaria Initiative teamed up with Tech Think Tank and an impressive crew of nearly 27 computer programmers to address this burden. The result of this collaboration was a hackathon, with malaria as the sole focus.

With the support of Coders4Africa and space provided by Mobile Web Ghana, the event kicked off on the morning of July 12 in Madina with 23 host country nationals and four PVCs, including hackathon innovator Joshua Kim. After greetings, PCV and Masters International student Matthew Ward gave an introduction, which included the event's goals and some humbling statistics to aid participants in understanding the magnitude of the challenge before them. Patrick Choquette and Matthew McAllister of Peace Corps' Office of Innovation even took time from their weekend to Skype in during lunch and offer their support.

PCVs Matthew and Joshua laid out four different application concepts that focused on the problem of educating people about malaria. The four concepts were ones that the coders may not have been familiar with, including Jeopardy, Duck Hunter, Quiz bowl, and a virtual room "what's wrong with this picture" game. Each of the coders volunteered to work on the concept they thought they could best develop with malaria education as the goal.

The coders broke into groups and selected which ones they would like to work and wasted no time and began furiously coding, both adapting old ideas and constructing new solutions. Participants included representatives from Wikimedia, Google, Meltwater Entrepreneurial School of Technology and Coders4Africa, to name a few. The first day wrapped up with devoted participants requesting permission to work on their projects at home.

Cooperation and idea sharing continued to flow like Fanta as new faces, including a few curious PCVs, arrived on the second day. Selom Banybah, a representative of the Ghana chapter of Coders4africa, shared his observation that PCVs "bring joy to all the work they do." This was the third hackathon Selom participated in with PCVs and definitely hopes it will not be his last.

After a few more concentrated hours it was time to display the finished products; presenters plugged into the projector and shared the work of the last two days.

The first mobile application, modeled off the game show Jeopardy, included four sections of malaria-related questions rated on level of difficulty. As players answered correctly, the questions became increasingly more difficult.

The [second mobile application](http://www.malariahunter.gweb.io/) likened a modern version of duck hunter, wherein players swatted mosquitoes as they flew quickly across the screen. Players were awarded points for killing as many mosquitoes as possible, all the while being provided the option to make donations to malaria prevention efforts.

The [final mobile application](http://malaria.apphb.com/#/) of the day shared a quiz bowl type game that included a variety of informative malaria facts.

The applications were then judged on a number of criteria, including practical application, visual completeness and overall identification with the malaria mission. PCV Matthew O'Neill closed the event by presenting awards to each of the participants. Overall the event succeeded by bringing together local experts with PCVs and generating new tools in the age-old fight against malaria in Ghana.

In early August, four of the original HCN (host country national) coders gave presentations on three applications to a large contingent of the PC Ghana staff. When the presentations were complete, staff were encouraged to ask questions, play with the applications and give feedback. Coders will polish the applications to make them ready for posting on Android soon. Conversation also generated new ideas for expanding on a quiz bowl type application that could be used to test malaria knowledge and compete with other players internationally, charting progress on a live leader board. We hope to move forward with the concept and ideally be ready for large scale implementation on World Malaria Day 2015.



# GirlTech 3.14159 – A Girl's Science and Education Camp in Uganda
September 29, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - GirlTech
Source: https://afrisciheroes.wordpress.com/2014/09/29/girltech-3-14159-a-girls-science-and-education-camp-in-uganda/

A few weeks ago I got a very lovely email from Alaina Wayland, a Peace Corps Volunteer in Uganda working as a counselor at GirlTech 3.14159, a science and technology camp for Ugandan girls ages 12-20. I am very honored and extremely touched by this very passionate and inspiring message which I share below.

To Olvious, Eseza, Anitah, Innocent, Ivon, Lodah, Clothilda – Thank you! Congratulations and welcome to the club of amazing female scientists! Be confident, be courageous and be creative! Be encouraged to pursue your heart’s desire, work hard and study science and math, which are rewarding and extremely useful (and fun)!

Alaina wrote “My Team is Team Gondwe, and my campers have a message for you!

We are campers at Girl Tech 3.14159 and we are on Team Gondwe. For the week, we have been trying to be a woman of science, just like you! To educate the other campers on the importance of science communication, we created a poem about you and your work. Here is our poem:

_Gondwe, Gondwe, Gondwe, Ha!_
_What a courageous woman she is!_
_A science communicator, teaching and sharing knowledge about science._

_Gondwe, Gondwe, Gondwe, Wow!_
_Men, women, young, old, rich, poor, have come to shine in education._

_Gondwe, Gondwe, Gondwe, Ya!_
_What a role model in my life!_

_Gondwe, we wish you well and we shall continue remembering you for the work you are doing._

*–Girl Tech Gondwe Team: Olvious, Eseza, Anitah, Innocent, Ivon, Lodah, Clothilda*



# Celebrations and Lessons Learned from Technovation Challenge
December 8, 2014
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
excerpt: Another PCV in Moldova helping with Technovation Challenge
Source: https://sarajoyhoy.wordpress.com/2015/05/12/celebrations-lessons-learned-from-technovation-challenge/

I want to introduce you to four inspiring and creative girls that I have gotten to know over the past 3-4 months.

We had been meeting about once or twice a week to work through the Technovation Challenge curriculum. [Technovation Challenge](http://www.technovationchallenge.org/home/) is a world-wide technology entrepreneurship program where girls from middle school or high school form teams from all over the world to work through a 12 week course learning about entrepreneurship and how to build a phone app. I worked with these girls as their mentor guiding them through the content and their ideas during this competition.

The theme this year was for teams to develop a phone app and business plan to address a problem or issue in their community. Once teams determine an issue in their community, they must come up with a way to address this problem and create a business plan, pitch video, and phone app using the AppInventor program. Plus, this whole 12 week course is done in English and the project must be submitted in English as well. This is pretty challenging for teams whose second or third language is English… but my team was up for the challenge.

I have to say that this was one of the most challenging things that I have done so far… and also the most rewarding. These girls are hardworking, persistent, determined, smart, and very creative. They encouraged one another through the whole process and I got to see their confidence grow and their English improve. We all learned a whole lot during this process…probably more than I can even begin to explain.

The girls presenting during the pitch event in Chisinau where they pitched their idea and presented to some of the other teams and tech professionals from Moldova. The documentary crew from the #girlsintech film were there filming that day as well.

Even with all the obstacles we faced leading up to the deadline, the girls submitted their project with 30 minutes to spare at 2:30 AM (since the deadline was at 5 pm PST which was 3 am here in Moldova).

We met up a week after they submitted their project to celebrate and I wanted to debrief what we had just went through over the past couple of months. I asked them a few questions to follow up on the impact Technovation Challenge had on them, and I am happy to share that the results were quite positive.

To give a brief synopsis of their responses… they were all glad they participated and agreed that they learned a lot of new things and had fun. When I asked them what they liked most about Technovation Challenge, two of the girls replied that they liked making their pitch video (which I will share next week), one girl liked "building" the app part in AppInventor while another liked the new experience and things she learned and the support from their mentor (yay!). When I asked what they liked the least, one girl replied "there were times I wanted to sleep but I knew I had to go to Technovation" while another one said that the hardest part was choosing one community issue — which took them about 3-4 weeks to decide and agree upon.

*What went well with your Technovation Challenge project?*
Cami: "All went well except for the 'presenting' the app part on pitch day"
Alexandra: 2. "The 'brainstorm' part."
Catalina: "The business plan."
Olga: "Everything went well."

*What was the biggest challenge for you personally?*
Catalina: "Building the blocks part in the AppInventor for the making the mobile app part sometimes."
Alexandra & Cami: "Speaking English!"
Olga: "The biggest challenge for me was the "design of the app" part and sending the whole information to the Technovation site."

*What did you learn about yourself through this competition with your team?*
Catalina: "I learned about myself that I can code."
Cami: "I learned that I can reach goals if I want to."
Alexandra: "I learned that I can improve my skills like speaking English."
Olga: "I learned about myself that I like to work in a team and that I am capable to realize such a project."

I asked them if they would do it again and they all agreed with a resounding YES! Then I asked them… now what? Now that they have learned some new skills, did they want to continue to learn more about IT and technology? … and the girls told me they wanted to continue to work on building their app and work on this idea to see if they could make it a reality regardless if they won or not. They have exceeded my expectations and they should be proud of the things they have learned and accomplished thus far.

So here's some very exciting news… this past Saturday Technovation Challenge announced the semi-finalists for each region. Our team was one of 8 teams from Moldova that submitted complete projects in the Europe/Asia/Australia/New Zealand division…** and they were selected as one of the semi-finalists!!! **

So now we wait until this weekend when they will announce the finalists of this world-wide competition. The judges will select 10 finalists who will then present their business idea and app in the world pitch event in San Francisco, CA in June.

I am so proud of these girls and all the hard work they put into their project to make a difference in their community. I will share the results next week along with their app idea and videos they submitted. Stay tuned!



# How do you get girls involved in global technology? Just ask.
December 8, 2014
By Chip Moreland
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
excerpt: Chip Moreland account of Moldova Technovation Challenge 2014 winners
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/how-do-you-get-girls-involved-in-global-technology-just-ask/

Last January, my girlfriend proposed that I organize and lead a group of girls from my school, in rural Moldova, to participate in an international coding and business competition for girls called Technovation Challenge.

At first, I laughed. The idea was kind of funny. Didn’t she realize how busy I was with teaching English? Or that I knew very little about business, not to mention even less about software development? Plus, I really couldn’t imagine any of my students being interested in something as out-there as computer coding.

Seeing my hesitancy to take on such a project, she presented an infographic that showed how the projected number of jobs in computer science was growing at a much faster rate than the people expected to study computer science. By participating in this project, I could share economic opportunities with my students that they didn’t know they had access to. This could mean a career path and better future, here in Moldova, and no green card or a work visa needed. Plus, she noted that the curriculum is in English, and it would be a great way to get some students to practice outside of class. My reluctance waned as I saw it as a way to nudge my students into extra English practice. Economic opportunity would be a tool to draw attention to the usefulness of the English language.

I was surprised how many students were interested in participating right off the bat.

There were about a dozen young women at the first meeting. The numbers didn't reduce much over the next few weeks, but for the sake of there not being enough hours in the day, we voted in the four hardest-working girls.

Technovation Challenge is a 12-week program during which the team has to create an Android application that solves a problem in their community. It sounds daunting at first, but Technovation provides a well-designed curriculum that covers idea development, how to develop a business and write a sound business plan. On the coding side, the girls learn basic coding logic with a fantastic program from MIT called, AppInventor, which uses color-coded blocks that fit together like puzzle pieces. It is fun and easy, kind of like training wheels for coding.

My passion for the project grew once the girls had decided on the problem that we would address: the poor quality of water in the villages of Moldova. After learning that 67 of the 300 students in my school suffered from Hepatitis A as a result of drinking the water from the wells, I knew that this problem was a righteous one to address and one that the American judges would consider a noble cause.

For the next three months, the girls and I worked tirelessly developing our idea and our application. It was not easy, but I grew even more motivated as I saw how the girls were growing in the process. Their English was improving each week, they were learning new useful skills on a daily basis, and they were growing more confident in themselves as a result.

The result was Aquamea. When it came time to turn in our final work, I reassured the girls that we had a winning idea, and that we had worked hard enough to be recognized for it. The competition would be held in San Francisco, my hometown, and I thought about how excited I would be to show them around if we got invited. Which…

WE DID! Out of 844 teams globally, we were chosen as one of eight teams to go to San Francisco (all expenses paid) to pitch our application and a chance to win $10,000 in seed money to start their business. I can’t even begin to explain how exciting this was for the girls and me. For them, they had never been outside of Moldova, never been on a plane, never had Mexican food, never seen the ocean, in fact there were about 1,000 “nevers” that they would get to experience. For me, I was so excited to bring my Peace Corps experience home, a kind of show and tell to my friends and family in California. PC goals #2 and #3: CHECK!

Although the trip was covered, it wasn’t easy to get there. We had three weeks to get all the documents needed and prepare the girls to eloquently present and answer questions in front of a large crowd in a foreign language. This is where being a PCV was an invaluable resource. Upon our invitation, we instantly had a task force of Volunteers and PC staff with a variety of skills to help figure out the logistics of getting the girls to San Francisco on short notice, and organize in-depth tutoring sessions to improve presentation skills and general business knowledge. Needless to say, without this network of support from our amazing Peace Corps family, we would never have been able to obtain the travel documents, nor would we have been prepared enough to win. Which, is what they did! We took first place internationally, bringing $10,000 home to a very proud country.

Winning for them was about more than just the money and the opportunity to start a business; it was proof that with enough hard work and determination, a group of girls from a small village in a country that most people have never heard of could win something big. It’s not the knowledge they’ve gained, nor the skills learned that gives me the most fulfillment from this experience, but rather the transformation of their attitudes. They confidently display a newly instilled sense of hope and optimism that have replaced uncertainty and doubt. Although Moldova is poor and its people lack a great deal of opportunity, opportunity can be made with hard work and a good idea.




# Meet Team Pandicorn
May 5, 2015
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
excerpt: 2015 Moldova Technovation Challenge team with PCV coach.
Source: https://sarajoyhoy.wordpress.com/2015/05/19/meet-team-pandicorn-latest-technovation-challenge-moldova-news/

Meet Team Pandicorn: a group of four girls ages 15-16 that I mentored for the Technovation Challenge entrepreneurship and technology competition. They each brought a different element to their project and I had the great honor to see them improve their leadership skills, working as a group, and seeing improvement in their English by the end of the program. They showed up every week on time and eager to learn and push through all the challenges they faced.

These girls are incredibly creative as they created the logo, videos, and came up with the app design in addition to all the other pieces they needed to submit their project. The name of their app is Smart-Ed which is an app that "connects people for honest learning".

As part of this world-wide competition, the theme for this year was to identify a community issue and come up with a solution by creating a phone app and business plan. They created the pitch video below to share their idea. They came across some obstacles with filming their video and they figured out a solution, all on their own. I was very impressed.

An issue they identified in their community was that in some cases more emphasis is placed on some students paying to get better grades than actually focusing on learning the material and earning it. Their idea was to create an app that would be a platform where students (or anyone really) could find a "learning coach" in their community to help them with their studies or to learn something new, like cultural handicrafts. They would connect through the app and then setup a day/time to meet in person and the "learning coach" would make a little extra income through meeting with different students and helping with different subjects.

**I asked them to share with me how they felt after they found out about making it to the semi-final round…**

*"After we found out that we were in the semi-finals I felt great because we stayed up until 3 am (the time they announced the results) and waited… and after we found out that we were in the semi-finals, we started to send each other "funny faces" and we were like "Oh, I can't believe" grin emoticon… which is hard to explain." – Olga*

> "I felt good and very proud of the team and also, very thankful to our mentor." – Catalina

**I asked them to share a fun or funny story from their experience with Technovation Challenge…**

*"I think the funniest part was when we had to film our pitch video and we spent about 7-9 hours for doing that because we laughed a lot. Like A LOT!!! (grin emoticon)" – Catalina*

> "The funniest story is when Alexandra and I stayed up late to find out what the results were. So we did everything to help one another to not fall asleep. Another funny story was when we all tried to film the pitch video because we spent 9 hours trying to film it and the result is a 4 min video, so that's just insane. (grin emoticon)" – Olga

They have expressed interest in continuing to create this phone app to make it a reality here in their community. I am looking forward to seeing what happens.

As for the latest news about the finals, we found out this past weekend that the girls did not make it to the final round. They have made such an incredible accomplishment by making it to the semi-finals which has added a boost for them to continue to work on this business-app idea to make it a reality. I am so proud of them.

Congratulations, Team Pandicorn! Well done, you have taught me so much and are such an encouragement to me as a Peace Corps volunteer, thank you! (grin emoticon) [click!]😉

*A side note, to answer a common question: So… what is a pandicorn?*

*It is a panda bear and unicorn together of course!*



# Technovation Challenge - AFishInMoldova
May 12, 2015
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
excerpt: Peace Corps Volunteer in Moldova helping with Technovation Challenge.
Source: https://tfish812.wordpress.com/2015/05/05/technovation-challenge-technovation-ungheni/

During the first part of this year, I had the opportunity to work with a group of three high school students and their English professor on a project called Technovation Challenge. The overall concept of the project was for the girls to create a mobile app for an android phone, a business plan and two videos (one pitching the business idea and the other walking through the app functionality) all of which was done in English. Last year a team from Moldova won the international competition and took home first place prize of $10,000 to be used toward starting their business.

The project was not only a challenge for the girls but it was for me as well as I had to develop some lesson plans for each meeting (there were some provided but I had to change the layout and some of the ideas here and there) and I also had to sit down and learn the software myself. After learning the software I had to turn around and teach it! Thankfully their teacher (and my Romanian language teacher) was there to guide us when the language barrier was most prevalent.

For the better part of two months, the team and I met 2 days a week for about an hour and a half or more each time, this was a challenge as everyone's schedules were demanding with other after school activities. We started the project from identifying a social problem and how we would be able to create sales and profit from solving that problem as well as developing an app.

The girls chose to tackle the issue of recycling in Moldova and if you lived here you would understand the need to approach this issue. Often piles of trash that included materials that could be recycled are strewn throughout the cities, on the sides of streets or in fields. So, Recycle Moldova, was created and the mobile app, 'Recycle with Me!' was born. The intent of the app is to inform people on the importance of recycling. Working hard at every meeting on the business plan, the app and then after our meetings going home and making not only two videos, but three others, the girls were able to create a great business concept for submission to the competition. We will be finding out in the coming month if they will get the chance to go to San Francisco and compete for the top prize.

I am glad I was able to be part of this team and look forward to working with all of them on other projects in the future! Here are the videos they submitted for the competition!



# Sensitivity
May 13, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - Nakaseke IT Camp
Source: https://mountainsbeyondmountainsuganda.wordpress.com/2015/05/13/sensitivity/

I got over my slump during the remainder of IT Camp. It amazed me what Peter Balaba could do with his expertise in hooking up UTL (Uganda Telecom Lines) to a village PTC and allow students and tutors access to reasonably fast internet speeds. I performed the typical action of taking photos and videos of campers and the directors, since the long-term goal of the camp was to follow up the skill of the youth with another advanced IT Camp in August. I documented sessions regarding Microsoft Office, YouTube, Typing, and even some basic Python Programming. A lot of these students never had the opportunity to be exposed to a computer program, let alone a computer.

I also got to spend more time with some of the facilitators from the Centre for Creative and Capacity Development (CCCD). They shared with me part of the story concerning how they came together as artists, dancers, and musicians a few years ago through YEP (Youth Empowerment Project). A lot of the members of In-Movement and CCCD shape the typical Peace Corps Uganda camp experience through kinesthetic learning. The message propagated by these facilitators empowers Ugandan youth to feel special and witness their ideas being brought to life. In the United States, it could be argued that not every youth should be told that he or she is special, but in Uganda more often than not most youth are told on a daily basis that their ideas do not matter.

With this perspective in mind, a lot of the creative facilitation sessions at camps such as IT Camp involve free and valued expression of self through skits, songs, dances, and group presentations. In many instances, these artful expressions evoke deeper emotions from the youth. During one River of Life session during a Peace Corps camp, the youth were asked to draw and write their life stories on a mural. One of the youth depicted herself being raped by her father, and shared this information with the group. The facilitator of the session shared that it was very probable that this was the first time in her life that she was asked to share her life experiences in a comfortable, safe, and non-judgmental manner.

It’s during moments like this that the problems concerning logistics, arguments, and petty difficulties among PCV’s take a backseat towards the larger issue that we are working to address. I feel like I’m making good use of my time exhausting myself through my participation in different camps in order to share the stories of these youth. By giving them a voice, they can be heard.

After a busy week at IT Camp, I spent the weekend in Kampala where I was able to simply chill and relax. On Saturday, I attended a TEDx Talk at the Serena Hotel where Ugandans shared their ideas concerning, healthy lifestyles, productivity, and smartphone apps. Not only was it cool to be at a TEDx talk, but it was amazing to hear Ugandans give short, succinct, and reasonably engaging presentations that delivered a message. One of the most interesting presentations came from a recently graduated Ugandan university student who developed a smartphone app that would easily relay the amount of produce that farmers could provide and transport to market day consumers.

Afterwards, I spent the rest of my time in Kampala watching YouTube videos and catching up on some news stories and pop culture over the past two years. I mean, I realized that within 7 months I will depart Uganda and head back to the developed world. In this sense, I am slowly easing myself back into what I used to be used to doing. I then went back to the village for two days where the money for the ICT Lab finally arrived in my supervisor’s bank account. Funnily enough, as I enter the home stretch of my Peace Corps service I can see my projects and worth as a PCV coming together. Right now I am back at the NARO agricultural center in Mukono where I am planning Community Integration sessions for the incoming Health and Agribusiness June 2015 group.

If the key point for the last training group was to be realistically positive about our experiences in Uganda, the modus operandi for this incoming group is to acknowledge sensitivity concerning pressing issues about gender, race, and poverty. Desensitization for older PCV’s vs. hypersensitivity for newer trainees is the overarching theme that we as community integration trainers have to address. There have been some complaints about older PCV’s that they don’t care enough the issues in Uganda.

I hazard that so many people back in the US can take the moral high ground and have the opportunity to discuss thoughtful articles and responses to those articles articulating the idiosyncrasies of gender identities, gentrification, and double standards. Here I believe that PCV’s have to choose their own battles to fight. Idealism only gets us so far and sometimes the haggard, pragmatic, and slightly jaded outlook of a PCV who just finished a male/female condom demonstration can bring about more positive change than someone gives a riveting speech in the village about the beauty of abstinence, family planning, and respecting your fellow person.



# 75 New SolarSPELLs Built!
May 19, 2015
author: Laura Hosman
Region: IAP
Post: Vanuatu
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2016/05/20/75-new-solarspells-built/

On Friday May 6, 2016, students at Cal Poly built 75 new SolarSPELL libraries! What's more, this feat—which included drilling, wire-stripping, soldering, gluing, taping, Velcro-ing, and much more, was accomplished in just a few hours.

The group did, in fact, get a jump-start on the build on Wednesday, May 4, having had the opportunity to set up all of the equipment, describe and train on what needed to be done in terms of assembly and building, and identify any potential bottlenecks for the assembly-line manufacture that would take place on Friday.

These SPELL libraries are destined for schools in Samoa, Tonga, and the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). In all three locations, we are working in partnership with the US Peace Corps, to provide their Volunteers with this educational technology to assist them in being able to carry out their mission of being teachers in remote, rural schools.

On the same evening of the build, the University hosted a gala evening for alumni, called the Evening of Green and Gold. SolarSPELL was invited to set up a display and speak to alumni about the project's accomplishments.

Even though the build was exciting and fostered a sense of accomplishment, there remains quite a bit more to be done besides building the hardware of the library. After the build, the students transitioned to working on gathering additional content for the library (especially content curated for our new partners Samoa and Tonga), testing out the new website, building a new-and-improved how-to-use guide.

We look forward to deploying the first batch of the new SPELLs in Samoa in June!



# Let Girls Learn - Girls In ICT
May 20, 2015
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
Source: http://winingwhining.blogspot.com/2015/05/let-girls-learn-girls-in-ict.html

Have you heard the First Lady talk about Peace Corps lately? No?! You're behind. Catch up.

Now that that's settled, aren't you excited about Let Girls Learn?! With this program, Michelle Obama is collaborating with Peace Corps in 11 countries - and Moldova is one of them. From the [Let Girls Learn](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/) website about Moldova: "In Moldova, 25% of female youth believe that "wife-beating" can be justifiable. Education and empowerment are needed to combat dangerous social norms. There are 120 Peace Corps Volunteers in Moldova working with communities on projects in English education, health and community economic development." [source](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/countries.html)

While ICT education is not education about domestic violence, it is something I find myself passionate about for girls, not only in Moldova, but all around the world. Men outnumber women in most STEM careers (Science, Technology, Engineering, Math). And WHY? Why can't we be scientists and engineers too? (My dad is reading this and thinking, *well then why were you an art major...? I told you to take Calc 2!)* But studies show that even girls who are passionate about technology don't choose to pursue careers in it! If girls in America don't think they can do this stuff than certainly girls here aren't sure either. So if I can empower them to learn skills in these areas, I feel that I should.

Girls In ICT is a global effort by the [International Telecommunication Union](http://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx) to encourage girls to consider careers in technology. In Moldova, [GirlsGoIT](https://www.facebook.com/GirlsGoIT) is a program with the support of UN Women, Novateca (the libraries program I work with), and a few other organizations. Last week, GirlsGoIT had an event for girls called Girls In ICT, so I took two of the girls I know from my English class to Chisinau so they could attend.

While the thought of being responsible for two 11-year-olds (who don't speak English) in the big city was slightly terrifying, it turned out to be okay. We got there early and walked around the parks to see the monuments of Chisinau, which they hadn't seen before. Then we went to the event, and we were the youngest attendees. ("We" meaning "them" because I'm pretty sure I was actually the old lady there.)

There were two presenters - one woman talked about different presentation software to use online, and the other woman, a graphic designer, talked about how to make a good presentation. There was about an hour and a half for both of them, and then an hour to actually make a presentation using one of the programs they had discussed. It was a little tough for the girls I brought, because it turns out they didn't quite know as much about using computers and the Internet as I had assumed, but one of the presenters was excellent about working with them and they were quick learners!

Each girl who attended the workshop made a presentation and sent them to the organizers of the event - voting is currently open (do it [here,](http://doodle.com/6cxmxfebcciwr5cz) if you'd like! Some of the presentations are in English) and I believe that the girl whose presentation gets the most votes will win an internship with e-Government Center Moldova!

Hopefully we can work on learning more IT skills back in the village with more kids, girls AND boys! I'll just have to learn some more specific Romanian, perhaps...

Want to know more about GirlsGoIT? Sign the manifesto [here.](http://girlsgoit.org/)

What about encouraging girls in Moldova to pursue STEM careers? Here's the gofundme page for a book called [Elena the Engineer](http://www.gofundme.com/inginerulelena) \- they are fundraising to send it to 500 libraries in Moldova!

And about Let Girls Learn? Here's the [White House page](https://www.whitehouse.gov/letgirlslearn) and here's the [LGL Peace Corps page](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/).



# Changing a Nation with Technovation
June 17, 2015
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
excerpt: Technovation Challenge in Moldova updates.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/changing-a-nation-with-technovation/

*As we continue to celebrate Women's History Month, we are taking a look at innovative projects that encourage girls' interest in STEM activities. Created in California in 2009, Technovation Challenge has been inspiring and challenging girls around the world to solve real-life issues with technology.*

Peace Corps Volunteer Chip Moreland first [wrote](https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/how-do-you-get-girls-involved-in-global-technology-just-ask/) about Peace Corps Moldova's involvement in the program in 2014 and it has been an increasingly popular secondary activity in the country ever since. In fact, the Technovation Challenge has been so successful in Moldova that girls and their communities are participating in multiple application creation workshops throughout the year.

**Technovation Challenge is the world's largest and longest running tech competition for girls.** Teams of young women come together with mentors and coaches to identify a problem in their community, create an app to solve it, code the app, build a company to launch the app in the market, and pitch their plan to experts, all in three months! The program teaches girls important life skills such as how to identify a problem, design and test a solution, collaborate with a team, and communicate to different audiences. Teams pitch and submit their ideas (through video) and participate in regional competitions. Once all projects are submitted, 10 finalists are selected worldwide to compete in the final competition in California.

In Moldova, an organizing team composed of Peace Corps Volunteers and members of their host community, as well as a number of international organizations, partner to implement meetings and workshops like United Nations Women. The team helps plan and disseminate information about the program throughout Moldova to encourage girls ages 10 to 18 to create teams with a local mentor or coach in order to learn the skills needed to complete deliverables needed to submit for the competition.

Right now there are 17 teams composed of around 60 girls and 25 mentors/coaches helping with curriculum implementation. The roles of the mentors and coaches are important as they are the ones to encourage and inspire the girls to keep going through the program as they learn and develop new skills, and oftentimes the mentors/coaches are also learning some of these new tech skills as well.

Many teams are mentored by Peace Corps Volunteers, especially in the rural communities. This is both beneficial for those communities and for girls who can envision opportunities that may only appear to be available in more urban areas.

Peace Corps Volunteer Sara Hoy has been mentoring a team of four high school girls in a community in northern Moldova over the past year. "These girls taught me a lot about working with youth – ways to encourage and inspire them, even when you may think you're not being effective. There were times I didn't think they were interested anymore, or were getting the information. There were a couple of points during the program when we were working together that I saw them have "lightbulb" moments. It was incredible and those moments kept me going. I didn't think they'd be able to submit all their information in order to make the competition deadline, but they did – they pulled it all together in the last minute, even with a couple of unexpected challenges that came up. They ended up making it into the semi-final round, in which I asked them if they were surprised about. They responded that "No, you told us we could do it, and look we did!" When they would hit [a] roadblock and want to give up, I told them they could do it, I knew they could figure it out… and eventually they did. I've watched their confidence grow and their English improve. I have even witnessed two of these girls become more involved in their community! The impact that working with these girls has had on all of us during those three months is beyond anything we could have expected. “There is a great deal of community support through local partnerships and sponsorships as they see the importance in providing opportunities for young girls in learning tech skills. Long-term benefits include the possibility that these girls gain an interest in learning tech skills and may pursue a career within technology or something they may never have thought of but through this program they may see a different perspective or option as they learn about various opportunities that are available in this field. This year's Technovation Challenge is off to a robust start. In January, Volunteers hosted a launch event called Girls Make Apps to kick off the 2016 season. More than 75 people participated, including girls and their mentors/coaches. It was an incredible opportunity for participants to meet other girls, gain new ideas, learn how to use the AppInventor program, and return to their community with a new energy to begin working on their projects and ideas to dominate the competition. The teams are looking forward to Moldova's regional pitch event that will take place on April 24. By May the semi-final round and final round will be selected, and then the World Pitch event is July 10-14 in San Francisco. Learn more about the Technovation Challenge [here](http://www.technovationchallenge.org/).

See how you can contribute to workshops like Volunteer Sara Hoy's on our Peace Corps Partnership Program [page](https://donate.peacecorps.gov/donate/projects-funds/#issue?subSection=issue-1).



# TechKobwa Camp For Girls - Inspiring Students And Teachers Since 2013
July 12, 2015
By Elisabeth J. Turner
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: News report of Camp TechKobwa
Source: http://reb-tdm.org/newsandevents.php?newsid=32

Rwanda's vision to become a technology-driven country may seem far off, but they are quickly making progress. Despite inherent obstacles in rural areas, one program is helping to overcome those challenges by developing technology-free pedagogy skills among Rwandan ICT teachers and inspiring both the teachers and their young Rwandan students to be confident in rural science and technology classrooms.

TechKobwa, began by Peace Corps Volunteers in 2013, is designed to empower young Rwandan women to speak up, raise their hand, and get creative with how technology can solve the problems of their communities.

Camp Director, Elisabeth Turner, kicked off the 2015 program on Tuesday 4 August with 10 ICT teachers at IPRC West in Karongi District. The teachers spent four days engaged in intensive training in ICT skills and STEM pedagogy, including lessons on electronics, algorithms, computer-programming, and using resources to teach ICT without computers. Lessons are organized and taught by visiting technology experts from Michigan State University and IBM.

Sixty secondary-age girls joined the program on Saturday 8 August and embarked on a weeklong journey to learn skills, gain confidence, and become innovative problem solvers. After camp, they will be encouraged by their ICT Teacher to start media and technology clubs to share their new knowledge with peers -- exponentially increasing the number of students impacted by TechKobwa.

The Kigali-based start-up Creation Hill has sent five of their best mentors to serve as role models, translators, and teachers during the program and will help the students with a Mission Innovation project in which they must identify and suggest solutions to some of their communities' most challenging problems.

Additional support for TechKobwa comes from the Ministry of Youth and ICT, IEEE-Computer Society, ACM-W, Girls in ICT, which provides strong Rwandan women to talk to the girls about pursuing careers and being confident, Korea International Cooperation Agency, and Kepler Rwanda.

G.S. Rugarama ICT teacher HABINEZA Theogene is enthusiastic about the TechKobwa experience, especially the Computer Science Unplugged curriculum taught by MSU Professor Laura Dillon. HABINEZA says, "This is a very good way to learn. When you put practice to the ideas, they are very understandable. I can easily use these activities to teach my students at school."

2015 participating schools include: IPRC West, KARONGI, G.S. Bukure, GICUMBI, G.S. Bumba, RUSTIRO, E.S. Murunda, RUTSIRO, G.S. APPEGA Garengeri, RWAMAGANA, G.S. Rushenyi, KAYONZA, G.S. Rugarama, BURERA, G.S. Gitwa, NYAMASHEKE, G.S. Gafunzo, RUSIZI, G.S. Janja, GAKENKE.



# Let Girls Learn - Jimmy Meet World
July 13, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Ghana
project: Ghana - Let Girls Learn Hackathon
excerpt: PCV account of Let Girls Learn Hackathon
Source: https://www.instagram.com/p/47pnjviw7q/

It is estimated that 54.1% of Ghanaian girls aren’t enrolled in secondary schools (SHS) and only 28.1% of girls complete SHS. Given that more girls in schools mean lower teenage pregnancy rates, lower maternal mortality rates, lower infant mortality rates, lower rates of HIV/AIDS, and better child nutrition, much more needs to be done to break down barriers to female education in Ghana.

Through the Let Girls Learn Hackathon, female SHS students and a team of developers will work together to brainstorm and come up with ideas for overcoming barriers to girls’ education. The students will also receive leadership and technical training as well as career advice from female leaders in STEM fields.
Support the Let Girls Learn Hackathon by visiting http://bit.ly/LGLHACKATHON or share this post with your family and friends.



# Owosso woman helps teach technology in Rwanda
July 12, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: Camp TechKobwa background on Louise Hemond-Wilson
Source: http://www.argus-press.com/news/article*6539585e-2828-11e5-8d5f-232e3164f9f1.html

**OWOSSO** — Louise Hemond-Wilson has traveled to more than 60 countries, but a trip to Rwanda last summer was unlike anything she had experienced before.

That's because Hemond-Wilson went to teach a special class focused on technology for girls, ages 12-22, at Groupe Scholaire de Janja, a Catholic boarding school in the northernmost province of the central African country.

It's part of an effort across Rwanda — which was ripped apart by civil war and genocide just over 20 years ago — to diversify its economy and improve life for all of its citizens, regardless of gender.

The class was deemed a big success, so much so that it allowed the school's headmaster, Fr. Alphonse Twizerimana, to come to mid-Michigan last month and discuss the country's difficulty with poverty at area churches.

"In our country, girls tend to be the most vulnerable in society," Twizerimana said Wednesday at Hemond-Wilson's home in Owosso. "So we think if you raise the girls, you raise the entire nation."

Hemond-Wilson, who works as an engineer at IBM, said she was called on by the company to perform a difficult task — first, travel to Rwanda where, far away from the conveniences that are expected in Western society, the natives boil their water so it's safe to drink and use latrines instead of modern toilets.

Then, she would go to a school that struggles with its technology infrastructure, largely relying on 3G service as its sole means of connection with an increasingly globalized society.

Finally, she would teach what she knows to 60 girls, many of whom felt uncomfortable speaking English, more who had never even seen a computer before.

Thankfully, Hemond-Wilson was not alone. The effort was made in conjunction with institutions including Michigan State University, the Peace Corps and the Rwandan government. Colleagues and family came along for the trip, including her own college-age daughter.

Regardless, it wasn't the easiest trip she has ever made.

"You get there and realize that there are few people who are my age or older, because of the genocide," said Hemond-Wilson, who is 50.

"It's very profound, the efforts that are being put forward to rebuild from nothing. I think it's very commendable. ... For my daughter, it was a 'Wow' moment. But I told her, more people in the world live like we lived for the time we were there than how we usually live."

The group would focus its effort on what became known as "TechKobwa" (roughly translates to "technology for girls" in Rwandan) — a two-week camp primarily focused on technology, but also incorporating elements of life skills, communication and problem-solving.

But before the girls came to school, Hemond-Wilson said, the group would teach the teachers of Rwanda — so that after the Westerners went home, technology skills wouldn't just go with them.

Indeed, that didn't happen. Twizerimana said that since the camp ended last August, girls at his school feel more comfortable than ever in using equipment that used to be considered "for boys only."

What's more, Hemond-Wilson will again travel to Rwanda next month for another TechKobwa camp — this time at a technological hub in a larger city called Kibuye, on the west coast.

"You can't give what you don't have," Twizerimana said. "Rwanda has started a competence-based curricula whereby anything learned at the school can be applied to life. We're not teaching technology for people to move on out of the country, but to use it as a tool to improve Rwanda."

Hemond-Wilson added that attendees came from all over Rwanda, most from areas even more remote than Janja, some traveling hundreds of miles by bus on dilapidated roads just to get there.

"We tried to focus on taking girls from places where there was an economic vulnerability," Hemond-Wilson said. "One of the things they did at camp was to come up with a plan for how they could perpetuate and expand on what they had learned here."

Breaking down language barriers can be a challenge, whether it's in learning English or binary code. One of the more interesting solutions, brought upon by a lack of Internet connectivity on a given day, came when Hemond-Wilson was trying to instruct students to be safe online.

Without the use of a computer, she instructed one student to act as a search engine and literally ask other students, acting as individual websites, whether they had the information she was looking for.

"It's actually a very visual way to teach what happens in a search," she laughed.

As many students were only comfortable speaking Rwandan or French, Hemond-Wilson said that getting her points across in English was difficult at first, despite the presence of interpreters. But as time went on, she began to see a breakthrough.

"There was this one girl in the audience when someone else was making a presentation who raised her hand and practically jumped out of her seat,

saying, 'I don't think this is going to work!' To have such a vocal display of her opinion, in English, was a pretty remarkable thing to see."

Hemond-Wilson and her associates left with a newfound appreciation for Rwanda — and Twizerimana prospered just as much.

Through the Catholic Diocese of Lansing's Office of Missions, he has for the past month preached at area churches including St. Paul and St. Joseph in Owosso and St. Mary in Durand.

"The difficulty he faces is so great," said the Rev. Jeff Poll, who led the congregation at St. Mary until recently moving to the pastorship at Light of Christ Parish in Deerfield. "It's about $100 for room, board and tuition, which is nothing to you and I, but there, it's a lot of money. And it still doesn't buy the basic necessities that you need in order to learn.

"His message was very well-received by the congregation and it was wonderful to have him over."

Twizerimana is scheduled to leave July 21 and return home — where, he says with a smile, he expects to see a number of students who want to hear how his dialect has changed in the month he's spent abroad.

But he will miss being in Shiawassee County.

"This has been a very exciting experience. When I go about Owosso, I see many people stopping and saying, 'Hi.' They're so good and friendly, and that's important to me," he said.

"When I came here, I didn't know what to expect. I just wanted to fit in. And everyone here has helped me to do that."

If you are interested in donating to Groupe Scholaire de Janja, write a check to the Diocese of Lansing, Attn: Accounts Receivable, 228 N. Walnut St., Lansing, MI 48933.

Call Dawn Lawless at the Office of Missions with any questions at (517) 342-2541.



# Uganda T4D Example
July 15, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
Source: https://www.instagram.com/p/5kqvqtcrb-/

Between the library work, reading intervention groups, two-hour workshop, and meetings of today I got to spend an hour finishing a movie with my MDD team. 56 pupils, girls and boys from P4 to P7, gather for hours and hours every day to sing and dance in preparation for our competition next Friday but today we got to relax and have movie time.

The first week at site I watched "War Dance," a movie about a small school in Northern Uganda who overcame endless obstacles and competed in the National Championship for MDD. I was immediately inspired. My lifetime love of creativity, art, and music re-emerged in a place I was least expecting it. Since then we have met for rehearsals throughout the week; they normally giggle as I sing, dance, and teach them my theatre "skills" (including improv sessions as a reward on Fridays). To inspire them further, I borrowed a projector, duct taped a white sheet to our mangled cement wall, and started a showing of this movie.

I've never seen a group of sixty teens more engaged. I love that these Lugbara, Alur, Kakwa, and Madi kids were learning about the other tribes of Uganda (I.e. The Acholi tribe & the Bwola dance)... They were learning about their own nation's culture! How cool is that? //This movie hits closer to home than I will ever entirely understand, although I understand more than my heart can really handle at this point. West Nilers are also survivors living in the war zone, people who have lost loved ones, and men and women who are still coping with the memories of those terrible times. I love helping these kids with artistic expression, with overcoming the terrible experiences of our lives, and with learning to channel our hope and perseverance instead of dwelling on our pasts.

You could have heard a pin drop in this room today. This also goes to show that even in a very poor school without water, electricity, or doors we can still use technology for learning and seeing different perspectives. If you have a spare 2 hours, I suggest you watch this movie and see just how incredible the young men and women in Uganda are.



# Girls Rock STEM
July 16, 2015
By Larissa Connett
Region: EMA
Post: Morocco
project: Morocco - Girls Rock STEM
Source: http://gadmaroc.blogspot.com/2015/06/engineering-creativity-girls-rock-stem.html

It's amazing how quickly a year passes. I remember this time last April when I had first arrived to site, I had met a teenage girl in town who had impeccable English skills. She became a really close friend over time and my quick connection to other girls in town. She was in her last year of high school and was studying hard for her Baccalaureate (BAC) Exam.

**Side note: The Baccalaureate (BAC) Exam is similar to exit exams in the United States, where students need to pass certain marks on subject tests in order to graduate or exit high school and continue to the workforce or continue their studies. However, in Morocco, the BAC Exam holds more weight in terms of deciding the future course of study for students. The subject areas with the highest marks are what you are able to study in university, setting forth a path that is determined by your skill set rather than where your passion may lie. **

My friend was really excited about the possibility of studying computer engineering in college. She wanted to be a software developer like her older sister. She studied rigorously for her exams. At the end of the BAC exams she received her results. Her highest marks were in English and that is the course of study and career field that she would be allowed to enter. It was hard to watch her excitement for going to university dissipate as she found that her skills did not necessarily meet her passion.

It was interesting to witness the difference in the educational structure of Morocco versus the United States, where autonomy is valued alongside standardized tests to determine what course of study/career field that you may enter.

With statistics stacked against girls in the STEM fields (particularly that [UNESCO's Institute for Statistics](http://www.uis.unesco.org/ScienceTechnology/Pages/women-in-science-leaky-pipeline-data-viz.aspx "UNESCO"), recording that less than 30% of the STEM careers in Morocco are held by women), the "leaky pipeline" with the lack of encouragement for young girls and women to pursue their interests in STEM fields does not go unrecognized. By observation, there are limited resources for students in general to discover their skill sets and passions in order to properly prepare a trajectory for studying and their careers. Things such as personality tests (Myers Briggs, True Colors, etc.), goal setting, guidance counseling are few and far in between.

Thus stemmed the idea of putting together a team to develop a week-long camp for girls across Morocco, to give them the platform to discover their love of STEM fields through alternative programming and service learning projects and to merge their skill set with their passion.

The Girls' Adventures in Mathematics, Engineering and Science (GAMES) Camp was a week-long spring camp held in my site with the help of several Peace Corps Volunteers and Host Country Nationals. Structured around exploring issues of environmentalism and sustainability through STEM lenses, we completed a mural, built a tire playground, constructed [KidWind](http://www.kidwind.org/) solar panels and wind turbine kits from [Vernier](http://www.vernier.com/products/kidwind/ "Vernier") and participated in a video exchange with STEM undergraduate students from [Philander Smith College](http://www.philander.edu/)in the United States. In addition, some campers participated in a land auction game that required them to think critically about how land is used, conserved and the consequences behind the decisions that we make. On top of the programmatic activities, we held a host of activities centered around leadership style identification through True Colors, team building and goal setting.

Over 60 girls, ages 14 – 18, participated in the camp and adopted several new technologies such as understanding how solar and wind energy can be harnessed and subsequently building solar panel and wind turbine kits, geo-mapping and engineering concepts through constructing a tire playground. The campers analyzed their personal waste generation, health and safety as well as creating Public Service Announcements about environmental issues.

My favorite part of the week (besides the random dance parties), was the day that we hiked up a mountain and prepared tajines for lunch. Note to self; guiding over 90 people and their expectations up the side of a mountain on a hot day is no easy task and it isn't the wisest decision to prepare tajines for that large group of people (pre-made sandwiches would be advisable for the future). However, we paired our hike and picnic with a few activities on the mountain like a scavenger hunt with facts about climate change and desertification, trash pickup and taking the girls to the edge of the mountain to see the beautiful panoramic view of our town. Hearing the gasps and silence in awe of the view made the whole day worth it! Also, on the climb down the mountain to return to the camp, we crossed the river and had an impromptu water fight.

The level of gratitude for the numerous individuals who put in effort to make this camp a success cannot be surmised into a short 'thank you'. However, deep appreciation and gratitude must be made to Vernier and KidWind for donating the solar panel and wind turbine kits that will be made accessible to Peace Corps Morocco volunteers to use for future programming. Philander Smith College, specifically Dr. Nastassia Jones and the Social Justice Institute, for arranging undergraduate students video projects on environmental pollutant cycles for the video exchange with the female camp participants. Also, M'Hamed Kadi, the Peace Corps Morocco Librarian, for the long list of resources that he provided to us and lastly, the real movers and shakers of the camp; Peace Corps Volunteers and Host Country Nationals who worked every day of the camp, from sunrise to sunset, and rolled with the punches to assure that every camper had an unforgettable time.

What an awesome week!



# Kumasi Hub of Global Shapers Community and Peace Corps present Let Girls Learn Hackathon - Global Shapers Community
July 21, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Ghana
project: Ghana - Let Girls Learn Hackathon
excerpt: Advance notice of upcoming Ghana Let Girls Learn Hackathon with Peace Corps/Ghana
Source: https://www.globalshapers.org/news/kumasi-hub-global-shapers-community-and-peace-corps-present-let-girls-learn-hackathon-6

All around the world, women are severely underrepresented in STEM fields (science, technology, engineering, and math). One reason for this is because 62 million girls around the world are currently not attending school. In Ghana, female graduates comprise less than 17% of those completing tertiary-level STEM studies. It is estimated that 54.1% of Ghanaian girls aren’t enrolled in SHS and only 28.1% of girls complete SHS.

Given that more girls in schools mean lower teen pregnancy rates, lower maternal mortality rates, lower infant mortality rates, lower rates of HIV/AIDs, and better child nutrition, much more needs to be done to break down barriers to female education in Ghana and around the world.

Through a 24-hour hackathon, the Let Girls Learn Hackathon will gather teams from different regions of Ghana to brainstorm, collaborate, and develop innovative solutions to barriers to girls’ education.

Each team will be formed by a diverse group of participants, including female SHS (secondary school) students, Peace Corps Volunteers, university students in STEM fields, and software developers. During the hackathon, the SHS students will also receive leadership and technical training, so that they can continue to effect change in their respective schools and work to overcome barriers to their education.

Global Shapers Community is an initiative of the World Economic Forum with a network of more than 400 city-based hubs developed and led by promising young leaders, with a mission to make positive impacts in our communities. The Global Shapers of Kumasi hub comprises of dynamic individuals committed to positively contributing to community, country, and global development.

Peace Corps Ghana traces its roots and mission to 1961, when President John F. Kennedy sent the very first 52 Peace Corps volunteers to serve their country in the cause of peace by living and working in Ghana. Those volunteers were received warmly by Ghana's first President, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah on August 30, 1961. Five decades later, Peace Corps Ghana is more vital than ever, working in critical areas of health, education and agriculture.

Additionally, Peace Corps Ghana equip volunteers to help implement critical initiatives like the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and Feed The Future (FTF) Food Security Initiative. Peace Corps Ghana Volunteers continue to help countless individuals who want to build better lives for themselves, their children, and their communities.

Peace Corps Ghana ICT Committee works to leverage technologies to support the works of Peace Corps Volunteers and communities in Ghana. The ICT Committee investigates how to incorporate various technologies in the daily lives of Ghanaians to improve development and quality of life, provides technical support to Peace Corps Ghana staff and volunteers, helps establish ICT labs at JHS and SHS schools, and organizes activities like the Let Girls Learn Hackathon to help promote Information and Communication Technologies for Development (ICT4D) in Ghana.



# Teaching tech and spreading skills in Rwanda
August 19, 2015
By Elisabeth Turner
Region: AF
Post: Rwanda
project: Rwanda - Camp TechKobwa
excerpt: PCV Narrative of tech skills and youth leadership camp for girls
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20151231173158/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2015/08/25/teaching-tech-and-spreading-skills-in-rwanda/

TechKobwa was launched by Peace Corps Volunteers in 2013, inspired by Rwanda's resilient and ever-growing information technology and communication sectors [ICT]. The purpose is to expose young women to technology in a creative, non-threatening environment that encourages them to explore, engage in and consider future careers in ICT. Lessons include basic computer skills, computer programming, photography, internet safety and electronics, as well as leadership development, problem-solving skills and career mentoring.

Additionally, a teacher training program, led by Rwandan technology experts and faculty and professionals from IBM and Michigan State University, seeks to equip rural ICT teachers with new technology skills, effective pedagogy and facilitation skills that they can utilize to improve their teaching and transfer ICT skills to additional students when they return to their schools.

TechKobwa 2015 hosted 60 students and 10 teachers from 10 schools across Rwanda. The primary sponsors included the Peace Corps, Michigan State University, IBM, Rwanda's Ministry of Youth and ICT, and Creation Hill, a Rwandan ICT mentoring program. Additional financial support was provided by IEEE-Computer Society and ACM-W. On the ground help came from Korea International Cooperation Agency [KOICA] volunteers, Creation Hill mentors, Akilah Institute and Kepler Rwanda. Members of Girls in ICT and Carnegie Mellon University-Rwanda participated in a Career Panel highlighting future opportunities for the participating students.

A Peace Corps Small Project Assistance [SPA] grant covered all logistical operations on the ground, with a generous donation of learning space and computer labs from IPRC West, Rwanda. Other funding provided visiting experts from the United States, ELENCO electronic circuitry kits and digital cameras as well as an external evaluator to conduct professional monitoring and evaluation of learning outcomes.



# 30 more SolarSPELL libraries built at Appropriate Technology Workshop and Build Day at Cal Poly
September 21, 2015
By Laura Hosman
Region: IAP
Post: Micronesia
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
excerpt: Solar-powered low-cost computers for education in Micronesia.
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2015/11/12/30-more-solarspell-libraries-built-at-appropriate-technology-workshop-and-build-day-at-cal-poly/

On October 24 2015, students from across Cal Poly's campus gathered for an interactive workshop on Appropriate Technology for the Developing World and to participate in the hands-on activity of building 30 additional SolarSPELL libraries. The workshop and build were led by Prof. Laura Hosman.

The students, representing a wide variety of majors, participated in a lively discussion about some of the challenges of bringing technology to developing world contexts, when a lack of technology may not have been the problem in the first place. The workshop also highlighted some successes and failures of ICT in developing regions.

The hands-on build activities saw students jumping in to solder, drill, heat-shrink, glue, fasten, cut, splice, affix, and much more…as they enthusiastically built 30 SolarSPELL libraries in approximately 2.5 hours. Feedback received from the event indicated that the students truly enjoyed the experience, and felt they were able to contribute to a real-world project.

Here are some quotes from the students:

*The simplicity of the SolarSPELL design made me realize what appropriate technology might look like.*

*The hands-on project makes you feel like you are making an actual contribution to helping address a problem. The design of the technology reflects the needs of the location.*

*It was a humbling experience that made me really consider the way technology interplays with social/political/economic situations.*

*I loved the build aspect because it made me feel a part of something bigger than myself.*

Cal Poly's own Mustang News covered the event and released a video featuring the day's highlights.

The 30 libraries that were built at this event are heading to Chuuk, which is one of the four Federated States of Micronesia. This will be SolarSPELL's third in-the-field deployment, bringing the total number of libraries in the field to nearly 80! We're looking forward to the on-site training in November.



# Computer training seminar opens doors for community
September 25, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Tanzania
project: Tanzania - Computer Training
excerpt: Tanzania computer training course led by PCV
Source: http://files.peacecorps.gov/multimedia/pdf/media/pctimes2013*04.pdf

PCV Elizabeth Crompton (2011–13) recently conducted a seminar in Tanzaniaon using a free, open-source computer operating system that is accessible in developing countries. Learning to search the web for information is a critical skill in Tanzania due to the lack of offline computing resources. Seminar participants also created an online community using the open-source operating system to help other students develop their computer skills. The ultimate goal of the seminar was to foster computing and programming skills that teach self-reliance and problem-solving and improve students’ employment prospects.



# Through the lens of youth
October 29, 2015
By Bettina Barillas
Region: AF
Post: Botswana
project: Botswana - Viewfinder Botswana
excerpt: Photography for social change
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20160101160855/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2015/10/29/through-the-lens-of-youth-photography-for-social-change/

Click. Click. Click. Clickclick. Clickclickclick.

Twenty young people brandishing brand-new digital cameras excitedly snapped pictures. The classroom was filled with *Ooohs!* and *Ahhs!* as the flashes pop-pop-popped away, leaving us, the instructors, with a vague feeling of being hounded by paparazzi. But instead of being at a red carpet gala, we were in a small village in Botswana teaching photography.

Our project, Viewfinder Botswana*,* seeks to give young people a voice to talk about issues that *they *care about. By creating powerful images, youth can help drive the discussion of decision makers in their communities… and make their villages better places in the process.

Although youth are the hardest hit when it comes to social challenges such as poverty, substance abuse and unemployment, they don't have an outlet to talk about these issues at the community level. Through our project, we empower our young photographers to drive the conversation around the issues that are important to them.

Through funding from the U.S. Embassy in Botswana, my fellow Peace Corps Volunteers Mike Frank and Maitham Basha-Agha and I train young people in basic camera handling, composition and ethics. Using loaned cameras, the youth then produce a portfolio of five images addressing a social challenge that they have seen in their village.

Tlotlo Bannyaditse—from Thamaga, Botswana—chose to photograph the impact of alcohol abuse on the young men in his village. In his photo, four young men are seen at a *shabeen* (a traditional bar) sharing a beverage called 'Power.' The drink's name comes from the strong effect of its main ingredient: battery acid. The beverage is so strong it melts through plastic cups. The youth in his photo use a glass mayonnaise jar. With [34.1 percent](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS) of youth in Botswana between the ages of 15-24 seeking work, Tlotlo sees that young people lack opportunity. Botswana is a land known for its plentiful diamonds and wildlife, but its most important resource—the youth—are often overlooked.

When Tlotlo's photo was shared with traditional and government leaders, they expressed surprise at the youth's hopelessness—one chief did not even know the drink 'Power' existed in his community.

In the three villages where Viewfinder Botswana has run so far, youth have documented social challenges such as unemployment, substance abuse, lack of reliable public transportation, single mothers and abandoned buildings used as places for crimes. Youth have also used the final project as an opportunity to talk about the things they are proud of in their communities. Said one Viewfinder graduate, "I chose to photograph young people in small businesses because I want people to know that we in Molepolole village try by all means to take ourselves out of poverty."

Lead facilitators and PCVs Mike and Maitham have learned much about their country of service as well! "Many things that I greatly understood were so greatly expanded by discussing students' photographs with them," Mike said. "I have gained a deeper respect for the people of Botswana through Viewfinder."

After 20 hours of classroom time and shooting, these images are displayed at a community gallery and community leaders are invited to begin a conversation on the documented social issues. To date, the galleries have been attended by tribal chiefs, ministers of parliament, representatives from the U.S. Embassy Gaborone, Botswana, social workers, professional counselors, teachers and international social organizations.

The program has gained many fans, including U.S. Ambassador to Botswana Earl Miller. Attending a gallery showing in Molepolole, he spoke to the huge benefits of using photography "as a flexible tool that crosses cultural and linguistic barriers… It is an accessible way to describe realities, communicate perspectives, and raise awareness of social and global issues… By empowering youth to discuss challenges in their communities, [Viewfinder Botswana] permits leaders to learn more about issues important to youth."

With the recent success of the project, the Viewfinder team hopes to take the programming across Botswana to other villages with Peace Corps Volunteers. If a picture is worth 1,000 words, imagine the impact of more than 100 PCVs training youth in their villages to share their voices across the country through photography.



# Kicking off Teacher Technology Training with the Peace Corps Volunteers in Chuuk
November 12, 2015
By Laura Hosman
Region: IAP
Post: Micronesia
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
excerpt: Solar-powered low-cost computers for education in Micronesia
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2013/08/16/kicking-off-teacher-technology-training-with-the-peace-corps-volunteers-in-chuuk/

A very exciting new chapter for the PISCES Project began last week when we met with three Peace Corps volunteers located in Chuuk, FSM. Pictured below, from left, are Ben Walter, Melody Alvarez, and Elana Meitler, who will be leading teacher training in technology use at the Chuuk Lagoon schools where they are stationed. Also pictured are Bruce Baikie and TR Mori, PISCES team leaders. It was fantastic to see them again and hear about the adventures they've had since we'd last seen them in March, as well as to hear about some of the exciting initiatives they've spearheaded in conjunction with the Department of Education—including working together on developing and establishing a repository of lesson plans for teachers at the state-wide level.

After catching up with them, we were eager to give them the training syllabus that our team (see the [previous post](https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2013/08/07/preparing-for-our-server-deployment-in-chuuk-rachel-pacific/)) had written over the past semester, with 10 suggested lesson plans for teaching first-time technology users. We're eager for their feedback on what was useful and what can be improved in the next edition.

We next showed them the solar chargers we had brought for Melody and Elana, as their schools currently do not have electricity. We were very excited to have found these [Ready Set Solar kits](http://fenixintl.com/readyset-power-system/), from Fenix International, as they provide an affordable, easy-to-use charging solution for tablets, as well as for mobile phones, which will be stationed at the schools on Romanum and Fefen islands, respectively.

We held a solar set-up training session outside of the iSolutions cyber-café, which was simple, straightforward, and attracted the attention of passers-by (as well as one curious canine!)

The next day, we had a training session on using the tablets, and on the contents of the of the educational server we had set up, which contains a repository of educational materials, based on the [RACHEL server](http://www.worldpossible.org/rachel), but localized for Micronesia in much of its content. This server's content will be available via a high-speed intranet that is already set up at the iSolutions cyber-café, and will soon be available to the schools at which the Peace Corps volunteers are stationed, once the paperwork is finalized with Telecom FSM and the long-distance Wi-Fi links can be established by the PISCES team.

We are so excited for this opportunity to be working together with the Peace Corps and for the possibility to have locally-based teacher-trainers at these island schools. We've asked Melody, Elana, and Ben to weigh in on whether the tablets are the desirable form factor, or whether ruggedized laptops would be preferable moving forward, as we plan to set up computer labs at their schools in the future. However, since I am of the opinion that the most important success factor for computers-in-the-schools initiatives are the teachers' attitudes towards and use of the technology, it is really wonderful that we can start off this initiative with teacher training.

We are very eager for the school year to start in a few weeks, and to hear from the Peace Corps volunteers how things are going!



# Spotting the Space Station with my village
November 23, 2015
By David Kurtz
Region: IAP
Post: Eastern Caribbean
project: Eastern Caribbean - STEM Education
excerpt: Showing the Space Station to neighbor kids
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/spotting-the-space-station-with-my-village/

The first few years of my federal career in the 1980's were spent at NASA headquarters working for the Business Management Division of the newly initiated Space Station office.

During those early "design phase" days, I looked forward to the future when the Space Station would actually be up in orbit, with astronauts on board carrying out interesting science experiments in zero gravity.

Little did I know that three decades later I would be a Peace Corps Volunteer on a tropical island, watching the Space Station go over my head, along with about 15 screaming children from my village.

It had been a good week for astronomical events in my village. Sunday night was a beautiful lunar eclipse, Monday night had a big, bright, nearly full moon, and Tuesday night was the first time since my arrival that the Space Station—now large enough to be the second brightest object in the night sky (after the moon, of course)—passed over top of Dominica. There have been a few passes overhead in the early morning hours, but I was waiting for an evening transit to invite my students to watch with me. Plus, I told many of the village residents to watch for it as well. It turned out to be a memorable event for all who saw it!

Anyone can go to [NASA's website and sign up](http://spotthestation.nasa.gov) to receive email notifications when the Space Station will be passing over your location. I often used the site back in West Virginia to watch the Space Station go by. After my arrival on Dominica, I was pleased to find out that this NASA service was not just limited to locations in the U.S., but also has many international locations. The only city listed for Dominica was the capital, Roseau, but I figured my village was close enough so that both the timing and directional information that NASA provides would be close enough.

I announced at school that I would be down at the playing field that night to see the space station, and anyone who wanted to join me would be welcome. The station was scheduled to pass overhead between 6:51 and 6:55 p.m. Some students said they would watch from their own homes, but others said they would join me.

As it grew darker, youngsters began joining me at the playing field next to our little primary school (which has a total enrollment of 30 students). At first, we counted stars as they appeared, and talked about the Space Station and what they could expect ("No, the astronauts will not be able to look down and see you waving at them"). While we were waiting for the designated time to come, I tried taking a picture of my "Space Station crew" (a few more came after the picture below was taken). It didn't come out all that well in the darkness, but I loved seeing so many youngsters who were interested enough to join me that night.

We were all eagerly counting down the minutes until 6:51. There were at least 15 of us, and maybe even a couple more. I was a bit worried when it did not immediately appear exactly at 6:51, but I should have realized that the mountains behind us would make its arrival a bit later. Eventually, one of the students noticed it moving up from behind the mountain. All the students started screaming with glee as this big, bright "star" silently moved across the night sky. (I think the students were yelling so loud because they wanted the astronauts to hear them!)

It turns out that many folks in the village heard their screams from the playing field, which alerted them that the special event I had earlier described to them was now taking place. Although it hurt my ears at the time, I enjoyed hearing their enthusiastic cheering as it flew overhead (the next day, one of the villagers who lives on top of the mountain asked me about all the screaming they had heard last night—apparently our screams reached clear to the top of the village!).

It was good to capture their imaginations about the vastness of space, and the universe beyond the confines of our little village. Hopefully we can do this again someday, but eventually the novelty will wear off. The first time is usually the best time, and that night was a wonderful experience!



# Fighting malaria with a cell phone - there's an app for that - Peace Corps Senegal
December 18, 2015
By Jensen Daniel
Region: AF
Post: Senegal
project: Senegal - Malaria Data Collection
excerpt: Data collection in Senegal for tracking malaria eradication
Source: http://peacecorpssenegal.org/2015/05/19/fighting-malaria-with-a-cell-phone-theres-an-app-for-that/

Since its inception in 2012, the active approach to community-based malaria management PECADOM+ (Prise en Charge á Domicile) has been scaled up and implemented in three districts of Senegal. The program will expand to districts in the Kolda region of Senegal this year, and is also being replicated in other African countries like Togo, Benin, and Madagascar. Results have been extremely promising: people who face barriers to receiving care are being treated during transmission season, and reports show a marked decrease in severe malaria cases.

As the program evolves, old problems persist, and new ones arise. In her experience with the PECADOM+ program in 2014, PC Senegal Health volunteer Sarah Mollenkopf saw that various issues were preventing the PECADOM agents (DSDOMs) from effectively collecting data on health-related behaviors and stock of anti-malarial drugs. Using [DiMagi](http://www.dimagi.com)'s [CommCare](https://www.commcarehq.org/home/) platform, she created a smartphone application she calls PECADOM+ Mobile.

The app essentially has 3 goals: to improve care for malaria, diarrhea and upper respiratory infections by aiding DSDOMs in correctly following treatment and referral algorithms; to improve PECADOM+ programmatic data to better inform decisions about personnel and stock management; and to collect data about health-related behaviors and other concurrent PNLP (National Malaria Control Programme) programs to better inform program strategy. The app achieves this through a user-friendly design that uses pictures to illustrate concepts for DSDOMs with low literacy, audio guidance in French and local language, and tools for data collection and stock management.

With the help of a small grant, Sarah was able to purchase mobile phones for the program and hold trainings for DSDOMs and community supervisors on proper usage of the phones and the mobile app.

You can read more about this project at the following links:

<https://peacecorpssenegal.org/project-case-studies/>

<http://stompoutmalaria.org/pecadom-resource-center/>

<https://www.commcarehq.org/home/>

<http://www.usaid.gov/partnership-opportunities/ngo/small-project-assistance-program>



# Biolite
December 27, 2015
Region: AF
Post: Malawi
Source: https://www.instagram.com/p/*0kexdvkw-/

BIOLITE x PEACE CORPS// "Biolite is the best Christmas present ever, and my most valued possession as a Peace Corps Volunteer in rural Malawi. I can make my own morning fuel in five minutes, and I use a fraction of the time, sweat, and firewood I 'wood' otherwise use cooking on a traditional mbaula stove. It also helps my case as I advocate for improved natural resource management in my community. It's a (bio)life saver!" Thanks @armansfield for sharing how you bring #energyeverywhere



# Managing Stock Levels with SMS Solution Aids Fight Against Malaria
January 25, 2016
Region: AF
Post: Senegal
project: Senegal - Malaria Smartphones
excerpt: Data collection in Senegal for tracking malaria eradication
Source: http://www.dimagi.com/blog/from-peace-corps-senegal-managing-stock-levels-with-sms-solution-aids-fight-against-malaria/

In the fight against malaria, Senegal has been a leader in West Africa in testing new strategies and implementing innovative solutions that has resulted in a mark decrease in malaria burden. However, one issue constantly plaguing the efforts of program administrators and critically restricting the positive potential of these programs has been the struggle to manage stock levels and avoid stock outs of key materials. Without prophylactic drugs and bed nets, the most vulnerable populations cannot be protected from getting malaria. And without reliable access to medications, those who get malaria cannot be treated.

In a growing partnership between [PNLP](http://www.pnlp.sn/), Dimagi, and [Peace Corps](http://peacecorpssenegal.org/), seven volunteers assisted during the training of regional, district and health post officials for the pilot deployment of a stock management application designed by Dimagi in the District of Kolda. Chief Health Post Nurses will use this application, [CommCare Supply](https://www.commcarehq.org/solutions/?**hstc=240960668.044ce714a9b853f008bea0d7287c3de0.1438018818025.1453735427115.1453737656171.467&**hssc=240960668.31.1453737656171&**hsfp=2117166925), on simple feature phones to send a weekly SMS reporting the level of stock of key malaria medications and diagnostic tests. The information from the messages will be summarized and analyzed automatically in a series of online reports that will be accessible by program administrators at all levels of the health system. This rapid system of reporting aims to improve the district's ability to anticipate or resolve stock issues.

Throughout the next year, Peace Corps Volunteers will continue to provide technical support on the ground for application use and data access and assist in information gathering to evaluate the program's value as it compares to other stock reporting systems already in place.



# The Bed Net Surveillance Program - Sarah in Mada
January 25, 2016
Region: AF
Post: Madagascar
project: Madagascar - Malaria Data Collection
excerpt: Article written by PCV on Malaria monitoring applications
Source: https://strawbqueen.wordpress.com/2015/12/18/the-bed-net-surveillance-program/

A couple weeks ago I attended a training in Tana (the capital city, Antananarivo), for Peace Corps Madagascar's new Bed Net Surveillance Program. As part of a malaria initiative, Peace Corps Mada is embarking on a new project that uses [Open Street Map (OSM)](https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=15/-20.2180/47.5075) technology to map many of our sites and then use that data to geographically view and analyze the usage of bed nets. OSM, for those who don't know, is similar to Google maps, but it is far more detailed, and is open source, so anyone can add and edit features. This is perfect for our use because there are groups who can crowdsource and help us map our sites from all over the world. Crowdsourcing is work done by groups of people who get together and map (and have mappyhours). We also had the help of students from home, as well as friends and family. By sending out the links to our specific tasks and sites, people were able to help make our base layer maps, which are satellite images with added features, such as buildings, roads, rivers, and their uses. In the three weeks between finding my site on OSM and attending the training, my site was almost entirely mapped! Thanks to the help of others, most of us volunteers only had to mark a few things, mostly labeling the CSBs, churches, schools, communes, markets, and things that only we would be able to do.

The next step is to print out the maps and take them back to site, so we can use them to collaborate with our ACs and other community members to track health phenomena, but bed net usage in this case. Volunteers will be conducting surveys to create coverage maps, meaning they will be surveying to see who uses and does not use bed nets. A note on bed nets–during this September through November, the largest bed net distribution in Madagascar's history took place, with 10.5 million nets given out in 92 of the 113 districts. After lots of census taking and mapping, the next phase of the project will be BCC, which is behavior change communication, one of the main aspects of what we aim to do as PCVs. After lots of work with our community members and CHWs, during which we will target the households, another survey will be taken to see what impact the BCC had, and another map will be made. This project will take up a good amount of time, and is expected to last through September or October of 2016.



# Engineers Week + Girls Day!
February 25, 2016
By Dominique Gebru
Region: IAP
Post: Jamaica
Source: https://twoyearsponderock.wordpress.com/2016/02/25/engineers-week-girls-day/

"Miss, did you mean to say 'she'? Your doctor was a woman?"

The other day, I was talking with a group of students and explained to them that I had made a visit to the doctor. One of them (a boy) was confused when I said that my doctor was a female. There were two Grade 3 girls standing with us, and as I told the boy that your gender has nothing to do with the type of career you have, that "a woman can be a doctor just in the same way that a man can," the girls chimed in, "and a man can be a nurse too!" The boy, oblivious to any embarrassment I felt for him, eagerly replied, "oh yes! I've met a man nurse already!"

Gender stereotypes disproportionately impact girls and women, particularly when it comes to career choice. Thankfully, both here and in the US, this is changing, but we still have a long way to go.

This week is celebrated as Engineers Week, and February 25th is extra-celebrated as Girls Day! Girl Day is a special day devoted to showing girls the creative side of engineering and inspiring them to pursue engineering and STEM career paths.

Currently in the US, only 12% of professional engineers are women. Teza Technologies, a US-based company, is working to change this. Check out their impressive (and shocking) infographic below:


School-aged girls are excelling in math and science, but more than half say they don't consider engineering or STEM professions for their future careers. [Teza Technologies CEO](http://mishamalyshev.com/) [Misha Malyshev](http://mishamalyshev.com/), works with nonprofits to reverse this trend and organize programs that teach students, especially young women, hands-on applications of science, technology, engineering and math. Girl Day takes place on February 25th and is an opportunity to teach girls about the difference they can make in the world as an engineer or STEM professional.

The status quo won't ever change if we do nothing. I'm taking advantage of my interactions with young girls and boys at school to promote gender equality through conversations like the one I had with those Grade 3 children about doctors and nurses. No one should ever be told that they can't pursue a profession (or even school subject) that interests them because of their gender.



# Girls are Powerful and Can Change the World
March 14, 2016
By Trisha Chang
Region: AF
Post: Uganda
project: Uganda - Nakaseke IT Camp
excerpt: Third-year Peace Corps Volunteer Leader Trisha Chang sat down with youth club leader Josephine N. to talk about her personal transformation through participating in Peace Corps camps and clubs programs.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/girls-are-powerful-and-can-change-the-world/

Third-year Peace Corps Volunteer Leader Trisha Chang sat down with youth club leader Josephine N. to talk about her personal transformation through participating in Peace Corps camps and clubs programs.

When I sat down with Josephine on a Friday afternoon, she had just come from a weekly meeting with her girls group in a central Ugandan village. She started the group to pass on the lessons and skills she has acquired through six years of participation in Peace Corps Uganda leadership and women’s empowerment programs.

Josephine’s motivation to pay it forward comes as she sees so many girls in her community without access to support or positive role models. A sentiment Josephine expressed several times throughout our meeting: “Everyone was born to be everyone.” In other words, all of us are born with the potential to be anything and everything we want to be, but we need support to get there.

Listening to Josephine tell her story, I was struck by her optimism and tenacity, and equally, by the appreciation she has for the Peace Corps Uganda family.

Josephine’s story is one so intertwined with Peace Corps Volunteers, and so embraces the vision of Peace Corps Uganda’s Girls Leading Our World (GLOW) camp program, it is hard to tell where one starts and the other begins. She began her relationship with Peace Corps Volunteers in 2009, when she was nominated by Liz K., a Peace Corps Volunteer at her secondary school, to attend her first GLOW camp. That week changed her life, as Josephine describes, by showing her “that girls are really great… they are powerful and can change the world. Before Peace Corps I never knew my worth, I never knew how important my voice was, I never knew that I could be part of change in my community… I never really understood that youth were the leaders of tomorrow.”

Since then, with the support of many Peace Corps Volunteers, she has attended two additional GLOW camps, one GirlTech camp to support women in science and technology, and was a lead youth facilitator throughout Peace Corps Uganda’s Youth Technical Trainings in April 2015.

Engaging participants like Josephine on an ongoing basis reflects Peace Corps Uganda’s long-term involvement model for youth development. Attending a local camp hosted by Volunteer and local partners is one entry point for youth to be brought into a system that aims not just to teach skills, but to provide ongoing opportunities for youth to develop confidence and practice leadership skills over time. Peace Corps Uganda, and Peace Corps more broadly, does not prescribe to one-size-fits-all.

For example in 2013, Josephine and fellow camp GLOW alum worked with their local Peace Corps Volunteer John V. to inspire girls in village schools in their area to take on leadership roles by presenting lessons they learned from camp, expanding the reach far beyond the original goal. Through John’s support and with the interactive and customizable camp curriculum, the girls had many opportunities to practice engaging with local youth and communities.

By October of 2015, Josephine had the confidence and leader ship skills to start her own community-based organization called YIELD, “Youth in Empowerment and Leadership Development.” YIELD works through local schools to empower young people, like its founder, to better understand health issues like HIV/AIDs and malaria, as well as take on leadership roles in their community. As Josephine says, “I have not to wait for people, or for my parents to wait for me.”

Through her tenacity and the support of Peace Corps Uganda’s youth programs, she is already part of the change and a shining example that youth are not just leaders of tomorrow, they are leaders of today.



# Preserving ancient languages with new technology
March 30, 2016
By Zach Rosen
Region: AF
Post: Benin
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20160330182115/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2016/03/30/preserving-ancient-languages-with-new-technology/

*Tayíri panna weìma nà hùàga, ííó?*

*Nateni forms sentences like bowls, correct?*

More than anything, it's the laughter of my Nateni informant, Hillaire SABI, and the emphatic clapping of his hand on my back that lets me know that I'm finally starting to understand not just basic Nateni vocabulary but some of the profound differences in how the Natemba both look at the world and use language to frame that worldview.

Language acquisition, even in European languages similar to English, can be one of the most difficult challenges a Volunteer will face during their service. To truly speak in another language, a Volunteer needs not so much to let go of their own culture and worldview so much as learn how to reposition themselves in the frame of their host community's social consciousness. If German philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein was correct in saying that "the limits of my language are the limits of my world," then the act of learning a new language is the tantamount to cartography during the age of exploration — an exercise in fear, stomach maladies and retracing the very boundaries of the world we see ourselves existing in. In a word: the singularly most daunting task you're going to face during your community integration.

Despite encouragement from the Peace Corps to acquire not just the national language of a Volunteer's host country but to concentrate on the acquisition of local languages as well, many Volunteers do not necessarily have the resources — or sometimes even a clear framework — to assist them in leaving the safe shores of English. This becomes an even greater issue in a country like Benin, in West Africa, where there are 55 recognized languages, and innumerable dialects. Peace Corps simply does not have the means to develop resources for every linguistic community in the country. However, with the modern omnipresence of technology like smartphones in our lives, even at post, perhaps Peace Corps doesn't need to.

It was this idea in mind that I initially began working on the development of an Android app that we could use to create a national local language database here in Benin. Several weeks and innumerable cups of coffee later, *BLA! *was officially launched in Benin.

The Benin Language Acquisitor app for AndroidOS (or *BLA!* for short) is just one response to the call for new linguistic resource development, using technology as the means to do so. The application allows users to collect Peace Corps-related vocabulary in their community, offline, and then upload that data to a cloud database when in range of either cellular data service or Wi-Fi later on. My team's goal is to create a database of each unique local language, cross-referenced by Volunteers' posts (so as to track dialectical differences, as well), all while working with the local language tutors and informants in the host community. From there, that database can be used to create dialect-specific language resources and even be used to develop new apps that Americans can use at home to learn some of the many beautiful languages spoken here in Benin.

Perhaps more importantly, however, time is running out to collect data on these languages at all.

Of the 7,000 known languages spoken in the world, some estimates show that by 2100 [nearly half](http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/enduring-voices/) of these languages will no longer be spoken — will go extinct. To understand the gravity of this, consider waking up one morning to the realization that English is no longer spoken — and never will be again — by your neighbors, by your friends or even by your children. Many languages, like Anii — a language unique to the community around the city of Bassila here in Benin — are likely to go the way of high school Latin far sooner than that, as aging populations continue to pass away without their offspring learning their ancestral languages or having sufficient means to record them.

Why is this important? Because to build an app like *BLA!* is actually not that difficult given adequate Internet resources and enough dark roast. This same project can be easily duplicated in, or adapted to (thanks to its simple coding), any other Peace Corps country in the world, making us Volunteers uniquely capable of creating and deploying similar language preservation projects across the globe.

We can, with technology as it is, start to record these languages before it's too late.

Considering how closely linked a language is to a culture's accepted psychology and cosmology (learning about and disseminating information about these two being the prime objective in all third goal activities), the fact that we can deploy software-based tools like *BLA!* is sufficient enough inspiration to do it.

Zach Rosen is a currently serving TEFL Volunteer and linguistics nerd in Benin, West Africa. His primary assignments include teaching 6th and 7th grade equivalent English at a rural CEG in the Atacora Department of the country, and working with Beninese teachers to improve their English proficiency and teaching practices.*



# Benefits of design thinking for ICT4D
April 18, 2016
By Brenna Grey Mickey
Region: IAP
Post: Vanuatu
Source: https://medium.com/volunteering-in-vanuatu/benefits-of-design-thinking-for-ict4d-2741df58e32b#.qbmh39bs0

On the walk to my first day of work in Vanuatu I wasn't quite sure what to expect. When I went to meet my future coworkers, no one was in the office. I had been assigned to work in the Ministry of Youth and Sports Development as a web design and development consultant through the Peace Corps Response Program, assisting in the project planning, implementation phase and being the technical liaison between my office and the Office of the Chief of Information.

Information Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D) is the leverage of communication technologies in aim to bridge the digital divide. ICT4D is remarkable in its definition, meant to serve as the great equalizer, giving a voice to people across the world, despite geographical location or monetary status, creating communication by finding solutions for issues of accessibility and affordability.

Design thinking is a type of problem solving for projects brings a flexible, iterative approach to clients’ needs, with the end result being a user focused solution. Design thinking is essential in the ICT4D world while leveraging initiatives and developing useful products, for people who would benefit from it the most.

Imagine giving primary school children on a remote island in the South Pacific access to online courses to learn English, or how having access to accurate weather forecasts could benefit a fisherman's business in Albania. Imagine a classroom full of girls being mentored by local professionals and international specialists, learning to code and design, bridging the gender gap in the tech field because of the necessity for a web presence for foreign aid. So often we take for granted the amount of information we have at our finger tips, as our mobile devices have essentially become extensions of our bodies.

## Having people on your team with different backgrounds can only make the product stronger

As an American, I have been raised in an extremely technologically and socioeconomically advanced society. I grew up with privileges like running water inside of my home, reliable transportation and medical care, a microwave, internet access, electricity, public schools; honestly without thinking about life without them. Most of my coworkers grew up on small, remote islands, only accessible by boat or plane. They had limited access to drinking water, a drop toilet or no toilet at all, outside living spaces, and access to public education only through the 8th grade.

My third day of work, we had a finalized site map and requirements document near finalized in two days, for not one website, but for three. The board members and stake holders were all eager to give their input in an activity that could loosely be described as card sorting. While my technical skills helped frame the process of the website, what was even more important was the content that we were going to be providing the user. Most people accessing these sites will be doing so through their smart phones, on islands similar to where my coworkers grew up. What would someone accessing the website from a 3G network on their smartphone want to find out? This is the point in which I realized how our backgrounds were going to in fact produce a stronger product than if an entire team of outside consultants were hired. This is one of the biggest benefits in my mind that the Peace Corps helps facilitate with goal one: To help the people of interested countries in meeting their need for trained men and women, allowing for cross cultural coexisting in the workplace.

## Mobile first isn't an option, it's a necessity

Mobile design in ICT4D should never be treated as an option. It is estimated there will be [6.2 billion smartphone users](http://techcrunch.com/2015/06/02/6-1b-smartphone-users-globally-by-2020-overtaking-basic-fixed-phone-subscriptions/) worldwide by 2020. This is 70% of the world's population using internet ready devices in less than 5 years. It is also estimated that mobile traffic will account for 80% of all internet access by this time, making the necessity for mobile products undeniable. While laptop or desktop computers are expensive and usually just in offices in Vanuatu, most families have access to at least one smart device, making the need for a mobile-friendly design a high priority.

This isn't a new revolution in the ICT4D world. Mark Zuckerberg launched Internet.org or Facebook's 'free basics' package last year with the goal of "bringing internet access and the benefits of connectivity to the two-thirds of the world that doesn't have them." Your phone now comes with the Facebook app and Facebook Message app in 37 countries across the world, you can then message and surf these apps with no data charge on whatever network you're accessing.

I've personally benefitted from this while living in Vanuatu, which is one of the countries that currently are involved with this program. I keep a phone with the specific service provider only for free, direct access to my friends and family across the world. This is quite literally making the world more accessible to the ni-Vanuatu people and visitors of their beautiful country, making global communication not only a reality, but free of expense.

## Not a user, but a human

Too often it is easy to throw around the widely accepted idea of user-focused design and taking away the humanistic aspect of who is going to be using the product. The word user to me makes it seem like the person only exists to use the product we're creating and doesn't take in to consideration the millions of other factors of their humanity. When designing a website or app, in the back of my head I always am thinking "would my mom be able to figure this out?" Too often we lose sight of the ones creating the experiences as the experts and how most of the users of the products will not necessarily understand what a hamburger menu on a mobile device would be used for or why it is so important to have intuitive interaction touch points.

This is even more important in ICT4D, taking in to consideration the limitations and environmental differences for the people using your launched product. While Wi-Fi is available in businesses and private residences in developed countries, most people accessing the internet in developing countries will typically use it from a 3G network.

Large hero images, while trendy and visually appealing, have a longer load time and will use more precious data, making them more of a nascence than benefit. Making the customer journey more than 2 or 3 clicks could again take up the more data, making the person using the product less likely to finish the journey, as well as speed through battery life, which on an island of only 80 people and 1 generator, is extremely valuable. Considering the person who is using your product more than just a statistical metric and instead of a human will only benefit your ICT4D endeavors.

When I brought up the idea that the websites we were building needed to work well on mobile phones it was like I saw a light bulb go off in my counterparts head. While this is a very small ICT4D initiative, it's been a very eye opening experience so far about the benefits of design thinking being essential during the process of project development.

I will post on [Instagram](http://instagram.com/brennamickey), [Facebook](http://facebook.com/brennamickey) and [Twitter](http://twitter.com/brennamickey), hopefully different content but no promises. *These thoughts and pictures are mine and in no way reflect the views or opinions of the U.S. Government or the Peace Corps.*



# Touchscreens touch lives in Benin
April 26, 2016
By Evan Fowler, Benjamin Lavin, and Jake Meyers
Region: AF
Post: Benin
project: Benin - CommCare App
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/touchscreens-touch-lives-in-benin/

Over the past few months, Benjamin Lavin and I have built a mobile app that tracks real, useful data as part of our work as Community Economic Development Volunteers in Benin. Peace Corps Benin Volunteers and our community partners are now using mobile technology to conduct standardized surveys about bed net coverage in our villages, asking community members to sign with their fingers on smartphones as they pick up their new nets, and tracking the demographics of the people sleeping under the nets that Peace Corps Benin has distributed. All of this information is automatically compiled in spreadsheets and easily accessible to project members.

In September, I was halfway through a long day at the Stomp Out Malaria Boot Camp training, and my energy was starting to flag. But as I listened to Dimagi’s Claire Cravero (an RPCV) describe the app-building platform CommCare, my fatigue melted away. I left boot camp with a deeper understanding of the potential of mobile technology and the confidence that Dimagi staff would provide support if and when I decided to build an app.

Although I had never built an app before, and in fact had just purchased my first smartphone a couple of months before, I left Stomp feeling empowered to build an app. I had seen the user-friendly interface and knew that I could learn the basics with CommCare’s online tutorial specifically tailored to Peace Corps Volunteers. CommCare provides an exciting way to collect data (which is an oxymoron in my book).

I started thinking about where an app might be useful in Benin. What data is really pertinent to our communities, donors and Peace Corps itself? Peace Corps Volunteers in Benin are exceptionally well-placed to find gaps in bed net coverage and distribute nets to fill those gaps. Roughly every three years, the Beninese government, with the support of several international partners including USAID, distributes nets to all of the households in Benin. Inevitably, there are people who are missed in these large distributions, like nomadic groups, orphans and students who live away from home. Finding these people is relatively easy for Peace Corps Volunteers and their work partners. The Programme National de Lutte contre le Paludisme (an initiative of the Beninese government, supported through PMI), provided the nets that Peace Corps Benin is distributing and has asked for information regarding missed populations so they can be more comprehensive in the next national distribution. Peace Corps Volunteers are also uniquely suited to collect information on bed net utilization.

Until February 2016, this entire data collection process was paper-based. Paperwork is bulky, difficult to decipher due to illegible handwriting and, if left sitting in a corner for too long, can become a home to mouse nests and spiders. The documentation piece of bed net distributions was a barrier to Volunteers who, like most people, would rather avoid paperwork when possible. Data collected via paper also has to be typed manually into spreadsheets for analysis, a time-consuming and inefficient process.

It became clear that a CommCare app to capture the data from the bed net distribution process would be useful to Peace Corps, donors and the Beninese population. I approached our Malaria Program Peace Corps Volunteer Leader, Hannah Eisen, with my idea. Benjamin Lavin, the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer for the Benin Against Malaria Committee, also signed on to the project. Together, we made a plan to collect all of the data previously captured through paperwork in a streamlined application built on the CommCare platform.

The app started as a plan on paper and slowly grew into a functional app in English. Translation to French took some time, as we had to make sure the language was clear and easy to understand even for someone with only a middle school education. After several iterations of the app that integrated input from Peace Corps’ Beninese staff, we were ready to test. Kelli Schmitz, a rural community health Volunteer, field-tested the app in her community. Her work partners’ education levels ranged from college to middle school. With a tablet in hand, they administered surveys to 60 households and distributed 132 nets, returning with valuable feedback from the field.

After incorporating their suggestions on wording and ease-of-use, we moved forward with our plan for training Volunteers and their work partners on how to use the app. We made a guide on how to use the application in both French and English with plenty of visuals. Peace Corps’ Malaria Initiative hosted two bed net distribution seminars during which Volunteers and their work partners learned the app and practiced their survey skills. By the end of these short trainings, everyone felt confident using the app and that they felt that they could use it for a distribution in their community. The most popular feature, especially among work partners, was the signature capture. People’s faces lit up as they watched their finger leave a mark on the screen.

All of the volunteers who completed the training plan to complete a bed net distribution using the app before they close their service. One Volunteer has already surveyed an entire Fulani camp. The Fulani are a nomadic ethnic group found in Benin and other regions in Africa. It took him two days to survey 150 households, with the average survey taking 2 minutes 37 seconds to complete. As soon as he had synced his phone, our Bed Net Officer could see how many nets he would need to distribute and start working on the logistics of moving the nets to the region.

The Benin Against Malaria committee welcomed new members in March. Benjamin and I trained four people on how to control and steer the Bed Net Distribution Application and discussed future possibilities (behavior change communication through diagrams and videos that are integrated in the app, for example). We also went over how to collect and disseminate the data so it’s most useful. There is a five-month overlap between when these officers were trained and when Benjamin and I will finish our Peace Corps service, so there is time for a complete transfer of knowledge as well as space for collaboration. We envision this app will be sustainable for years to come, growing and shifting as data collection needs change. CommCare runs on any Android device and PC Benin is procuring 20 Android phones for the malaria program, to be made available to Volunteers as they use the app.

Our bed net distribution app has been published on the CommCare exchange [here](https://www.commcarehq.org/exchange/cce3c6fe614589aec9959e5c6b802388/info/). Anyone can download it and make changes so that it fits their own country’s needs. The PC Benin team hopes that this tool is useful in other countries and can help facilitate the distribution of treated mosquito nets.

*Benjamin Lavin and Evan Fowler are a team of Community Economic Development volunteers based in southern Benin. Benjamin is a New Yorker who studied economics and statistics at Macalester College and currently works with a trash collection service, trains womens’ groups on food preservation, and does monitoring, reporting and evaluation for the Benin Against Malaria Committee. Evan, who is from Louisville, graduated from American University with a degree in international relations and focuses her efforts in Benin on teaching business skills to apprentices and working with gender-equality programs. At the close of their service in September, Benjamin aspires to continue to work in international development while Evan will pursue a career in industrial design.*



# Vanuatu's Smart Sistas celebrate International Girls in ICT Day!
April 27, 2016
By Brenna Grey Mickey
Post: Vanuatu
Region: IAP
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/vanuatus-smart-sistas-celebrate-international-girls-in-ict-day/

SMART Sistas is an innovative new camp that brings together ni-Vanuatu girls ages nine to 14 to attend sessions on everything from leadership skills and girls’ empowerment to technology for development.

This May, Volunteers Laura Loveland and Grace Whitmore, along with Peace Corps Vanuatu staff and local non-governmental organizations (NGOs), will host the first ever Sistas Mastering Advanced Real Technology (SMART) Sistas Information and Communications Technology (ICT) camp.

After starting a technology committee in 2014, Volunteers realized that adolescent girls throughout Vanuatu needed to be included in the country’s burgeoning ICT market, as women– especially in rural areas - were historically underrepresented in the technology and innovation space.

Grace, Laura, and others wanted to create a supportive and fun environment for technology learning. “We thought that a camp would provide the individualized attention needed as well as the camaraderie among the participants,” said Grace.

Volunteers will choose 10 girls from the central Shefa Province to take part in immersive courses that leverage web development, computer-aided graphic design, and game-making to help students broaden their horizons and improve their understanding of the tech industry. The girls will also receive specialized training on leadership, gender empowerment, and career exploration – looking at career options in the telecommunications, computer hardware/software, and electronic media fields, all of which have been steadily growing in Vanuatu.

SMART Sistas is an innovative new camp for ni-Vanuatu girls ages nine to 14.

In fact, Vanuatu’s tech community has experienced intense growth over the past few years. Last year the United Nations celebrated Vanuatu’s innovation with an award for improving ICT to reach Sustainable Development Goals. Vanuatu has also benefited from a newly installed submarine cable promising to deliver “super-fast” internet speeds, and the Telecommunication and Radiocommunication Regulator (TRR) recently launched community computer labs, tablets at schools and internet cafes countrywide to spur greater technology use and creation.

Volunteers leveraged this energy and engagement to pull together tech leaders from TRR, the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, USP Emalus Campus, Wan Smolbag, and private sector partners including software innovators Garden Code and TechRocket as well as Computer World who provided hardware. “Our goal when designing the camp was to make it as sustainable as possible,” said Returned Volunteer Lynda Mae Wilson. “Instead of it being a “Peace Corps”-sponsored event, we designed it to be community-focused. We also have active members, both male and female, from local banks, universities, telecommunication companies, the government IT agency and local nonprofits.”

SMART Sistas gives girls who may not be familiar with ICT time to explore and play. Twelve-year-old Nukurei says that coming from a village and having little experience with laptops and tablets makes her feel like an outsider in the capital, Port Vila:

“The girls in Port Vila… they play most of the time with their toys. They call these toys laptops, and sometimes tablets which makes me confused. I can’t do what the girls do. I see them draw and paint using their fingers. They can talk to their friends and see their friends’ faces at the same time. Wow! They even type letters and play games on these machines. They talk about going online and Bluetooth. I am so ashamed because I don’t know what they are talking about.”

Volunteers hope that the SMART Sistas camp will help girls like Nukurei feel more confident and included in the technology space. Thus far, more than 70 girls applied for the camp, confirming that need for tech skills is strong. Volunteers hope to expand the camp to other regions in Vanuatu next year and bring more girls than ever into the tech field.



# Let's Talk about Sex(ual Health)
May 5, 2016
Region: IAP
Post: Nicaragua
project: Nicaragua - Chat Salud
excerpt: Peace Corps Passport article on Chat Salud
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20151231174600/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2013/08/16/lets-text-about-sexual-health/

Yesterday I googled “safer sex.”

You’ve possibly done it too. Most people have. Perhaps you wanted to double check something that your friends were talking about or maybe you were simply curious about an aspect of your own health and didn’t want to navigate a face-to-face discussion.

While sex permeates many aspects of our lives, including health, relationships, self-esteem and gender dynamics, it is still a sensitive and often uncomfortable subject. For topics such as sex, the Internet is particularly useful. One of its unappreciated beauties is that you don’t need to endure the discomfort of an in-person conversation. Instead, you can investigate your concerns and questions in private. After all, your search engine can’t judge you. But how do you get the answers you need when you don’t have Internet access?

In January 2012 I moved to Nicaragua to serve as a reproductive health educator with Peace Corps. During my training a fellow Volunteer suggested that one of our roles as Volunteers was to serve as Google for our communities. At first I found this idea slightly condescending — I don’t have all of the answers. But then I understood his point. In more developed countries, people are used to finding answers to intimate questions independently. However, in a country like Nicaragua, where only 10.6% of the population has Internet access, most people do not have the luxury of finding immediate answers to more embarrassing inquiries in an anonymous manner.

In smaller communities the reality is that the public health system is not easily accessible. This is due to a number of barriers, including geography, socioeconomics and culture. Additionally, generations of cultural beliefs have led to the perpetuation of false information. Getting correct answers to sensitive questions generally requires a face-to-face conversation, and in small communities this usually involves friends, family or both — even in the medical center. Anonymity is rare and pena, — meaning embarrassment, shame or shyness — is abundant.

Like everyone, Nicaraguans have questions about their sexual reproductive health and want to make informed decisions. While Google is not an accessible or familiar resource to many, Peace Corps volunteers have identified a tool that can help Nicaraguans bypass the “pena barrier” that needs no cultural adoption – the cell phone.

In Nicaragua, more people have access to cell phones than to indoor plumbing or electricity. After months of discussing various strategies for using cell phones to deliver health messages, Peace Corps volunteers and their Nicaraguan colleagues settled on a platform: ChatSalud.

ChatSalud, an SMS-based sexual and reproductive health hotline, is the first of its kind in Nicaragua. The goal is to empower Nicaraguans to lead healthier, safer and more productive lives by providing correct sexual reproductive health information and connecting them to local resources in a free, confidential, reliable and accessible manner, directly through their cell phones.

Using FrontlineSMS, a free, open-source software, we have been able to leverage its auto-response function to create a platform that will deliver culturally sensitive and contextually correct information on five central themes: reproductive health, safer sex, HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and domestic violence. The system is entirely demand-driven and interactive; users can select which theme to explore and from there select the information he or she wants to receive.

Users “info” to ChatSalud and automatically receive a text that contains a menu of informational categories: the menu says “Text 1 for HIV,” “2 for STIs,” “3 for safer sex” and so on. Users then continue to text to receive more detailed information. From teenage girls approaching their first sexual relationships to men wanting more information on STIs after noticing a potential symptom, to women concerned about the cycle of violence who are looking for domestic violence resources in their communities, ChatSalud is a resource for all Nicaraguans.

*Chloe Lew is a current Peace Corps Volunteer in Nicaragua and ChatSalud´s public relations advisor. She has been living and working in a small community in Nueva Segovia since 2012. There, her service has been largely focused on girls’ empowerment and teen pregnancy prevention.*



# Successful Second Deployment of 25 SPELL Solar Digital Libraries with Peace Corps in Vanuatu
May 20, 2016
Region: IAP
Post: Micronesia
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
excerpt: Blog for the SolarSpell ongoing project - also in Vanuatu
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2015/09/21/successful-second-deployment-of-25-spell-solar-digital-libraries-with-peace-corps-in-vanuatu/

The Solar SPELL team from Cal Poly held a full-day training session at Peace Corps Headquarters in Port Vila, Vanuatu, on September 9, 2015. Volunteers traveled to the training from across many of the islands that comprise Vanuatu, and were extremely enthusiastic about being able to use the digital libraries in the schools and communities where they are stationed.

This training was the second of two this summer carried out by Cal Poly Professor Laura Hosman and the team of students in the Liberal Arts and Engineering Studies (LAES) Program at [Cal Poly](http://www.calpoly.edu/) who worked on designing, developing, and deploying the library over the past few months. A total of 50 Spell libraries have been deployed with the Peace Corps in the Federated States of Micronesia and in Vanuatu.

Prof. Hosman led the training with the assistance of Ginger Jacobs, a student who participated in the LAES course. Ginger played a leading role in finding and curating the library's content, and led the training that focused on that area. Another student from the course, Beth Hotchkiss, who had focused on the library's design and production while on-campus, served as the team's videographer and photographer during the on-site training.

The Peace Corps volunteers across the Pacific Islands commit to two years of volunteer service, and are most frequently posted to schools. The majority of these schools will not have reliable electricity/power or Internet connectivity, so these libraries are designed to provide relevant educational content in these challenging environmental conditions—especially for first-time users of such technology.

The [Solar SPELL](http://solarspell.org)library was designed to help meet the needs of the Peace Corps volunteers, vis-à-vis enabling and improving education, in the field. It includes open access content, much of which is localized for the Pacific Islands. The offline library's content can also be found in on-line version here: <http://pacificschoolserver.org>

The library's hardware is designed to be as simple to use as possible, with no moving parts in order to avoid overheating. The solar panel and plastic case are waterproof, providing an extra level of protection against the salt air and humidity that is ever-present in the Islands.

After covering the nuts-and-bolts of how to use the library (and the tablets) during the morning session, the afternoon training session shifted to a more frank discussion of the societal, political, and human-nature-type challenges that the volunteers might face in introducing new technology to places it has not been used before. New technologies are most frequently disruptive when introduced for the first time. We therefore initiated a brainstorming and discussion session of "What might happen?", "What could go wrong?", and (therefore) "What *should* I do?" Considerations such as meeting with village chiefs and school principals before introducing the technology within the schools or communities were brought up. Many participants reflected that this session had been, for them, the most valuable of the day.

The enthusiasm of the Peace Corps volunteers was matched only by the gratitude they expressed to the team for our work on the libraries, for its relevance and helpfulness to their work, and for the training session itself. This appreciation was echoed by the Peace Corps staff as well. It was both humbling and extremely gratifying to hear so many expressions of "Thank you so much," "This will be so appreciated by my community," "This is fantastic."

A quote from the first email of thanks we received, the day after the training: "I really can't praise or thank you all enough for what you've done (and are still doing) in this project, and feel very privileged to have a role in it. That being said, I can at least say this much:

Y'all done real real ***real*** good."

Our team is particularly grateful to Peace Corps Vanuatu Country Director Keith Honda, for being an early supporter of the project and for encouraging the partnership and training to take place, and to Alexis Cullen PCV, for her diligence and enthusiasm in spreading the word about the libraries across Vanuatu's volunteers, and in co-coordinating the training. Additional thanks to Solomon Jimmy, and we look forward to keeping in touch with all of you as we gather feedback from Vanuatu and work to improve the libraries!

The SPELL Solar Digital Libraries project was made financially possible through a Community Grant from the [Pacific Telecommunications Council](https://www.ptc.org/community/initiatives.html#ptc-projects), an in-kind donation (of Banana Pis) from [LeMaker](http://www.lemaker.org/), as well as an in-kind donation (of Nexus 7 Tablets) from [Inveneo](http://www.inveneo.org/).



# Encourage Girls from Technovation
May 21, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
Source: https://sarajoyhoy.com/2016/05/21/encourage-girls-from-technovation/

Technovation Challenge is the largest and longest-running tech competition for girls. It entails a 12-week curriculum that girls ages 10-18 go through with a mentor or coach. They learn how to identify a problem in their community and figure out a solution by creating a business plan and mobile app. Plus, all of this is done in English! An incredible challenge since for many of them this is an introduction to new things like writing a business plan, critical thinking through developing a mobile app in AppInventor, and utilizing English (often times their 2nd or 3rd language)!

I had shared a few weeks ago about the [Regional Event we hosted in Moldova](https://sarajoyhoy.com/2016/04/29/inspired-by-girls-in-technovation-challenge/) where a local Moldovan team had advanced to the semi-final round. Thanks to local community support and through a crowdfunding campaign we're making it possible to send the girls to participate as a visiting team during the World Pitch Event in July in San Francisco.

The girls will have the opportunity to attend the World Pitch Event and participate in learning from workshops, tours of tech companies, and network with other girls from around the world who are problem-solvers from their communities and future women in tech! We still need help in this crowdfunding campaign with about one week left! Give, share, and be part of encouraging girls in developing IT solutions!

Thanks to these awesome local partnering sponsors: Tekwill, Sun Communications, and Girls Go IT all funds will be doubled! So if you give $25… it turns into $50! Viola! >> <https://igg.me/at/tech-moldova>

This year has been an incredible year, from the all-star organizing core team, to the mentors/coaches who rose up to the challenge, and all the girls who worked long hours on turning their ideas into reality. By the semi-final round Moldova ended up having 3 teams in the semi-finals! Three! A great accomplishment that all 3 teams should be proud of!

Although the 2016 season for Technovation Challenge Moldova has come to an end for all the teams in this year's competition, it appears that some teams are still planning on continuing to develop their ideas and mobile apps. We look forward to seeing these girls continue to learn and make their ideas happen!



# Introducing UX, UI and interaction design at an ICT Camp for Girls in Vanuatu
May 25, 2016
Region: IAP
Post: Vanuatu
project: Vanuatu - SmartSistas
By Brenna Grey Mickey
excerpt: Professional UX designer uses her skills in Peace Corps Response.
Source: https://medium.com/volunteering-in-vanuatu/introducing-the-concepts-of-ux-ui-and-interaction-design-at-an-ict-camp-for-girls-in-vanuatu-f363f9ea5eba

Being in the right place at the right time has never been as applicable as when describing how I got involved with being able to teach at the SMARTSistas ICT Camp for Girls. This camp is an initiative that has been in the works since 2014, from a former volunteer who did most of the leg work, but her time was up in Vanuatu before the camp was fully planned and funded. Thankfully, Peace Corps people are the best and there were willing volunteers to pick up with the committee right where she left off. The[SMARTSistas ICT Camp for Girls](http://www.smartsistas.vu/) is part of a wider Peace Corps initiative, [Let Girls Learn](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/).

## What is Let Girls Learn?

"As part of the U.S. government's commitment to Let Girls Learn, First Lady Michelle Obama and the Peace Corps have formed a powerful collaboration to expand access to education for adolescent girls around the world. Educating girls is essential to healthy and thriving communities but, globally, 62 million girls are not in school, and barriers to adolescent girls completing school are particularly significant. In some countries, fewer than 10% of teenage girls complete secondary school.

This program will address that challenge by empowering local leaders to put lasting solutions in place. Peace Corps Volunteers who live and work at the grassroots level will serve as catalysts of community-led change, and every American can get involved and make a difference."

Having the opportunity to participate, even in the small amount that I did, in a Let Girls Learn program is something that is really meaningful to me. After living in a few developing countries, there are trends about gender roles and inequalities that are a little more in your face than they are in the states.

The projected short term outcomes of the SMART Sistas Camp are to increase self-esteem, develop skill set knowledge of how to develop and master information communications technology related careers. The long term outcomes include increasing the number of women in the ICT field, long term skill development, closing the gender gap for IT positions and increasing knowledge to reduce poverty.

## Vanuatu Specifics

It is estimated that only 6% of schools in Vanuatu have internet access which puts approximately every 205 students in competition for every one computer. While the need for digital literacy is high, the availability to learn these skills is low. It's estimated that 80–90% of households throughout all 84 islands in Vanuatu have access to at least one mobile phone. However, according to the [National Republic of Vanuatu](http://www.themosttraveled.com/%5CVanuatu%5CICTs%20in%20the%20Vanuatu%20Schools.pdf), Vanuatu is the first government in the world to have a detailed report for a MGOV (Mobile Government), meaning there is a specific plan in line for the national government to dive into mobile communication technology.

While most islands do not have access to computer labs at schools, most homes have smart devices. The SMART Sistas ICT Camp for Girls allowed 10 girls, 5 from the Shefa province and 5 from the other provinces, to travel to the capital of Vanuatu with her parent. They attended 24 hours of ICT technical training through the[TechRocket.com](http://techrocket.com/) curriculum, 12 hours of leadership and gender empowerment training, and 4 hours of career exploration in web design, networking systems and telecommunications, totaling in one full week of learning. They were introduced to HTML/CSS, Python, graphic design and web design. It also happened to fall during the national ICT Days in Port Vila, celebrating the opening of the new convention center and discussions about the realities of ICT in Vanuatu.

## Schools across Vanuatu are categorized in to 3 ICT categories:

Level 1 — The minority, schools that have a working computer lab for students, with an average of 10 desktops, all secondary schools (about 20/514 schools or 3%)

Level 2 — The minority, schools that have no lab for students, but a few computers for teachers and admin (about 50/514 schools or 9%)

Level 3 — The majority, schools that have no computers or ICT capabilities at all (about 445/514 or 89%) [*The Republic of Vanuatu](https://www.ptc.org/assets/uploads/papers/ptc15/2.%20Briefing%20LT%20%20PTC%20%20v%20final.pdf)

This is what makes SMARTSistas ICT Camp for Girls essential in the development of ICT literacy throughout the provinces. I was asked to teach a session during the web design and development day of the camp, accompanying a local developer's sessions on HTML5 and CSS3. With the target audience of this presentation being girls from 9–14 years old, with a different cultural background than my own, I was a little nervous. I have never taught anyone this young web design before and I was a little nervous I wouldn't be able to get the general ideas of UX, UI and interaction design across to girls who had little to no knowledge of web design before.

I decided to put my presentation together ([presentation on Slide Share](http://www.slideshare.net/BrennaMickey/smartsistas-web-design-presentation)), presenting in English but having a majority of my slides in Bislama, the national language of Vanuatu. While the participants in the camp all could speak English, I wanted to have a frame of reference just in case something was missed. I also tried to give real life, and easy to relate to examples to ideas like UI design. I provided the definition to UI design the followed by questions about a book on fish. I asked the girls if they were creating a book cover for a book on fish what would go on the front of that book? Would that book cover change if it was a children's book about fish? Would that book cover change if it was a book teaching you how to catch fish? I found examples like this really made some light bulbs go off and allowed for them to translate these new ideas surrounding web design and relate them to things they already knew about.

After leaving the session I was a little uncertain how well it was understood or perceived. As I was walking out of the door, one of the Peace Corps Volunteers in charge of the camp came up to me and said "they want to know more, can you make a hand out or something for them to take back?" Now, if that isn't good feedback I don't know what is. I almost felt a little stupid not thinking of doing something like that in advance, of course they're going to need a hand out, the majority of them will not have easy access to internet when they go home.

The experience was humbling, uplifting and overall amazing to see girls that wanted to learn about development and information technology communication. I just happened to be in the right place at the right time, and that was 8,200 miles away from home.



# Meet Team 'Girls in Power'"
June 2, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Moldova
project: Moldova - Technovation Challenge
Source: https://sarajoyhoy.com/2016/06/02/meet-team-girls-in-the-power/

I've had the great opportunity to directly work with 2-3 Technovation Challenge teams over the past 2 years during my Peace Corps service. This past year I worked with the team, *"Girls in the Power"* from Balti composed of 4 high school girls and an amazing computer teacher from their school.

For most of the girls who were between 14-16 years old, this was their first time doing anything like this and working together as a team. Their computer teacher, Mrs. Inna has been teaching for a total of 10 years in informatics and this was also her first time to experience a program like this as well.

Technovation Challenge is the largest and longest-running tech competition for girls. In Moldova this is the 3rd year it has been happening here. For 12-weeks, girls ages 10-18 go through a curriculum with a mentor or coach. They learn how to identify a problem in their community and figure out a solution by creating a business plan and mobile app. Plus, all of this is done in English! An incredible challenge since for many of them all of these things are new to them.

The girls from "Girls in the Power" created a business plan and designed an app called 'Emotional Test' to address some of the problems teenagers face, such as difficult communication with adults, misunderstandings with their peers, dependence from the virtual world, desires to be confirmed by society and lack of trust, etc. Teen suicide is on the rise in Moldova, and girls are even more affected than boys. The app they created proposed a test to identify one's emotional state and offers advice based on the results.

I met with the girls and Mrs. Inna a few weeks after this year's program and local competition. We celebrated the end of the school year and all that they had learned and accomplished since we first met in January.

I asked them a few questions as we reflected over the past couple of months during the Technovation Challenge program.

**Q: What did you learn from Technovation? **

*"I learned how to work in a team, to be more careful about small details, and patience." – Catalina*

*"I learned interesting information from the psychologist we worked with. Also I learned how to make a business plan and how to make it interesting with info-graphics." – Patrisia*

*"I learned about how to use a new program like AppInventor." – Mrs. Inna*

**Q: What was the most challenging part? **

*"The most challenging part was working in a group and trying to implement the database into our app." – Iulia *

*"Working in English was really challenging, but it helped us!" – Valeria & Patrisia*

*"It was challenging to prepare our presentation in English." – Patrisia & Catalina*

*To note: For most of these girls they have never before presented in front of a large group of people nor have they done so in English. *

**Q: What was fun about Technovation? **

*"To immediately see the end result of making an app using AppInventor and the end result of everything when it all came together." – Catalina*

*"To be able to see the results immediately after the girls did something in their project." – Mrs. Inna*

**Q: Tell me something interesting or funny about when you were working on your project together…**

*"I learned how important it is to make sure you save your work. One day I was working on our app in the AppInventor program and we lost all the information I had just done. I had to rebuild it all over again. It was a hard lesson to learn." – Catalina*

*"We had fun, we took time to dance together during our breaks (laughter)." – All*

*"It was a great experience and very interesting to go to the Moldova ICT Summit to learn about ICT in education in Moldova and to share about our experience." – All *

**Q: What do you hope to do now after going through this experience?**

*"To take time to keep learning new things." – Patrisia, Catalina*

*"We want to go to the Girls Go IT camp and to keep learning!" – All *

* * *

It has been a joy to get to know these girls and Mrs. Inna during the Technovation Challenge program this year. For me, I watched their confidence soar as they learned new things together. My favorite moments were when they would exclaim out loud their excitement when accomplishing something new or seeing the results of their work immediately. To me, that's what this program is all about in how these girls are gaining the confidence and interest in considering the field of technology whether it be on the front end with design or as a computer programmer. I look forward to seeing what each of these them does and where they go in the future! Bravo fete! Keep going!



# We are the Girls of Tomorrow
July 26, 2016
Region: AF
Post: South Africa
project: South Africa - Girls of Tomorrow
By Chris Harris
excerpt: The idea for the Girls of Tomorrow Program was born while waiting on a taxi one early September morning.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/we-are-girls-tomorrow/

The idea for the Girls of Tomorrow Program was born while waiting on a taxi one early September morning.

I thought back to the giants in science that had inadvertently catalyzed my own interest in STEM (science, technology, engineering and math). Growing up, we all heard names like Einstein, Carl Sagan and Galileo, but what about women? How are girls in South Africa going to develop a passion for the sciences without female role models?

When I started work at my site, I wrote a Let Girls Learn Peace Corps Partnerships Program (PCPP) grant proposal and we launched Girls of Tomorrow. My desire was to galvanize girls in our community through empowerment and education. My fellow Volunteers and I too frequently see our female students get pregnant or lose interest in school because they lack job opportunities post-graduation. Girls in our communities are disproportionately burdened with domestic duties and often shy away from math and science because they are traditionally male-dominated subjects. But we know that women earn more on average when working in STEM fields, and that communities do better as a whole when women are well-educated and independent.

Through Girls of Tomorrow, we worked with 120 Grade 7 girls, strategically reaching them before they enter high school. We conducted school visits to three schools over the course of a month, and transported the girls to the science center to engage with our resources, staff, and educational and empowerment activities. They also were given space to study and meet women already working in STEM fields so they would have local role models they could look up to. Working with my colleagues, I developed a booklet highlighting female leaders in STEM for the girls, as well as other resources celebrating the achievements of women in STEM.

Students, teachers and principals alike were supportive; we distributed the booklets we created and excitedly watched as the girls flipped through them and read about the struggles and achievements of the women in them. They broke into groups and chose the women that they connected to the most. Over the next month, the girls developed presentations on the women they were studying, to be presented to professionals in STEM fields.

When the big day arrived, guests included STEM professionals from as far as the U.S. and India, and leaders from agencies like the Department of Science and Technology and the U.S. Consulate. The girls paraded into the science center singing “We are the Girls of Tomorrow!” We opened the day with a number of speeches from accomplished female scientists, the U.S. Consul General in Durban and university faculty. The girls roared with excitement and could hardly wait to present their projects.

When it began, the audience was impressed by the confidence and poise with which the girls presented. They performed dramas, poems, songs and dances. We couldn’t believe that these girls were only 12 years old. One group that called themselves “The Space Girls” performed a 10-minute drama on the life of Mae Jemison, the first black female astronaut.

Another group, “The Clever Bunch,” wrote and performed a song about the neurosurgeon Alexa Canady, causing members of the audience to cry (including me!). They confidently sang, “What Alexa Canady has shown us, is that even if no one has ever done something before, you can be the first.” What a difference it was from the beginning of the project: Most of the girls had never spoken publicly before in their lives, let alone in front of an audience full of scientists!

The overwhelming success of the project has inspired us to launch a second phase of Girls of Tomorrow. Our plan is to bring these same girls to the university to learn how to apply, what careers are out there and how to make the most out of high school. They’ll also become ambassadors for the project and teach their sisters and younger classmates some of what they learned. And we’re bringing the boys on too, as “Ally Ambassadors.” We couldn’t be more proud of these girls and how far they’ve come, but more importantly, how incredibly proud they are of themselves.



# Micronesia Peace Corps SolarSPELL Program extends into Second Year with Training of Incoming Class of Volunteers!
July 28, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Micronesia
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2016/07/28/micronesia-peace-corps-solarspell-program-extends-into-second-year-with-training-of-incoming-class-of-volunteers/

The US Peace Corps in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) hosted the SolarSPELL team for a second year as the team carried out a workshop with this year's incoming class of Peace Corps volunteers. The training took place in Madolenihmw, Pohnpei in July, 2016.

Laura Hosman and Bruce Baikie led the training, which included an overview of the SPELL library's hardware, website/educational content, and the tablet that the team included for each Peace Corps volunteer to be able to access the library's content once in the field.

The training also benefited from a (surprise!) special guest talk by one of last year's cohort of volunteers, Dana, who spoke to this year's cohort about some of the potential and unexpected challenges they might face in using the SPELL libraries at their schools, when the workshop transitioned to the discussion of teaching strategies, potential in-field challenges, and how to address them. Thank you, Dana, for sharing your insights and contributing to the training!

The SPELL team is especially grateful to the Peace Corps staff in FSM, particularly including to Rodney Salas, who was an early champion of the SPELL project and its implementation with the Peace Corps volunteers FSM. Not only was FSM the first country to receive SolarSPELLs, it is also the first to renew the partnership and invite the SPELL team back for a second year. We're very grateful for the opportunity and continued cooperation!

The Peace Corps volunteers in FSM, and indeed across the Pacific Islands, commit to two years of volunteer service, and are stationed at schools. Most of these schools will not have reliable electricity/power or Internet connectivity, so these libraries are designed to provide relevant educational content in these challenging environmental conditions. The Peace Corps volunteers' responsibilities include teaching English, using technology where possible, and working together with the community and the school to help improve the education available at the schools where they are serving.

The Solar SPELL library was designed to help meet the needs of the Peace Corps volunteers, vis-à-vis enabling and improving education, in the field. It includes open access content, much of which is localized for the Federated States of Micronesia and for the Pacific Islands. The offline library's content can also be found in on-line version here: <http://pacificschoolserver.org>

The library's hardware is designed to be as simple to use as possible, with no moving parts in order to avoid overheating. The solar panel and plastic case are waterproof, providing an extra level of protection against the salt air and humidity that is ever-present in the Islands.

Thank you, Peace Corps FSM for a second year of collaboration and cooperation with SPELL!



# Girls of Tomorrow
August 4, 2016
Region: AF
Post: South Africa
project: South Africa - Girls of Tomorrow
Source: https://girlsoftomorrow.wordpress.com/2016/08/04/girls-of-tomorrow/

The idea for the Girls of Tomorrow Program was born while waiting on a taxi one early September morning. I thought back to the giants in science that have inadvertently catalyzed my own interest in STEM, years ago. Growing up, we’ve all heard names like Einstein, Carl Sagan, and Galileo, but what about the women? How are the young girls here in South Africa going to fan their fiery passions without role models they can connect with? Did I even know, if my students asked me, which females in STEM I would point them to? I knew my extension at the University of Zululand Science Center was coming up, and so I developed a tentative plan to galvanize the young girls in the area using successful females in the STEM fields as role models.

The primary goal was to empower girls. I wanted to make sure that they didn’t feel like we were pushing the STEM studies onto them. For this reason, we would emphasize the women who were outstanding in STEM, not necessarily the science itself. By doing so, we could simultaneously foster interest in STEM studies, studies which are dominated by men and which consistently lead to lucrative and rewarding jobs.

As soon as I started my extension at the Science Center, I hit the ground running. Within the first week, I briefed my colleagues on my ideas and we developed a more structured plan. We excitedly wrote the Let Girls Learn grant and began developing the resources we’d need for the project. We decided to target 120 Grade 7 girls and hit three different schools. We chose this age because we knew the girls would enter High School in the next year, and wanted to motivate and provide them with tools as they move into unfamiliar and often threatening environments. Too often in this area girls don’t make it through High School. We wanted to give them a reason to.

I put together a compilation of notable females in STEM for the girls to use while my colleagues surveyed local schools. My booklet featured women from various fields within STEM and from countries all across the world, especially from the continent of Africa. We developed posters, teacher trainings, games, gender workshops etc. and as soon as the funding came in, we launched.

We located three schools that we knew would excel in the project. When we arrived at the schools in early April and met with the girls and their teachers for the first time, we could see that their excitement nearly matched our own. “We want to study science!” they screamed. We put on a drama for them and introduced ourselves and the project. The teachers and students were eager to move forward with the project, and throughout the course of the month we continued our visits.

The girls received our Girls of Tomorrow Booklets and broke into groups. They chose the female in STEM that they felt most connected to, and soon after began working on projects on their new heroines. All of the girls developed posters and accompanied them with some form of presentation. Some of the girls wrote and acted out poems, some created intense dramas, and some performed original songs. As we aided the girls in the development of their projects, we knew that we would arrive with something incredible in the end.

After getting to know these girls for a month, and letting them get to know us, we bussed all three schools to the Science Center. I brought on five other Peace Corps Volunteers and together we worked closely with the JICA Volunteer who I’d been executing the project with as well as Science Center staff and interns. Throughout the day, we ran gender workshops, a teacher training, empowerment activities, science shows, and role model talks. The girls even got to meet real female scientists who came in to support them. At the end of the day, the girls practiced their presentations and used the microphone for the first time so that they’d be prepared to present. They then recorded what it means to them to be the “Girls of Tomorrow.” They wrote things like, “Being a Girl of Tomorrow means that I will never give up and never lose hope!” and “It means never forget who you are and what you want to be.” The energy was soaring as we saw them off at the end of the day.

Over the next week, we prepared for the girls’ final visit, which was the big day where the girls would officially become the Girls of Tomorrow! It took a lot of preparation, but judging by the success of the event, our work paid off.

The day started with explosive energy as the girls filtered into the Science Center singing and dancing, proud to show the world their work over the last month and a half. We had guests from as far as India and the United States, and from science occupations throughout South Africa including the Department of Science and Technology, the University of Zululand, the South African Agency for Science and Technology Advancement, and Science Centers across the country.

The ceremony began with a variety of interesting and earnest speakers, mostly female scientists who discussed their own struggles growing up in male-dominated fields. Dr. Betty Kibirige, for example, told us the poignant story of her gender struggles growing up in Uganda and how she eventually became a Professor of Physics. Our speaker of the day was the U.S. Consul General in Durban, Francis Chisholm, who told a personal story and discussed her own children’s’ studies in science in addition to her eloquently-spoken, prepared remarks.

Next, the girls had the chance to tell their stories to the dignitaries. In a poster exhibition, the girls talked about the women they’d been studying and also their own hopes and dreams for the future. The intention was for the girls to get exposure to the guests, but in reality, the guests are really the ones who gained something from their interactions with these wide-eyed and sanguine girls, ready to take on the world.

Following the posters were the presentations. This was surely the highlight of the day as the girls sang proudly across the stage or confidently played the roles of the women they’d been studying. Their presentations were phenomenal and were excellent representations of the passion they’d shown for their studies throughout the project. It was really beautiful.

After lunch and at the end of the day, the girls, their teachers, and the guests returned to the auditorium. Proudly and with huge smiles on their faces, and even some tears, the girls officially became the Girls of Tomorrow! They sang and danced and told us with their eyes how much it meant to them to be a part of this project. It was unclear whether we were more proud of them, or they were more proud of themselves. There was no doubt; the project was a major success.

After it was over, the teachers pleaded to continue the project. The schools were graciously supportive and the learners thirsted for more. Now, we are planning phase two of the project, where we will train the Girls of Tomorrow to be Ambassadors for the program, and even bring in the boys as Ally Ambassadors. “This was just too good to be a once off event,” said the Director of the Science Center. And indeed it won’t be. This project will continue for a long time to come, and after these girls move into High School, we will start with a whole new group of girls, and even reach other schools.

As we move into phase two of the project, myself along with the Science Center staff eagerly await the day we hear the girls screaming again, at the top of their lungs, “We are the Girls of Tomorrow!” and teach them to share what they’ve gained with their sisters, schoolmates, teachers, and even the boys.



# Let Girls Learn Technology
September 5, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Thailand
project: Thailand - Hour of Code
By Andrew Snyder
Source: https://pctmagazine.org/2016/09/05/let-girls-learn-technology/

*Sanook, mai?* Was it fun? *Sanook Mak!* Soooo much fun! This is probably the most important question and answer whenever we do a project or activity in our communities. Sometimes our activities have kids running around and laughing, sometimes they work as a team to accomplish a goal, and sometimes they are just enjoying the opportunity to learn a new sport or activity with their American friend.

Whatever the case, as PCVs we are often looking for creative, fun and innovative projects to take back to our sites. Here is where the work of the Technology for Development (T4D) committee comes in. Maybe you have heard of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) projects but are not sure what they are or how you might start one. Perhaps you have been asked to, or are interested in implementing some project-based and problem-based learning activities. If you can relate to any of these situations, T4D would like to share two upcoming initiatives; Hour of Code activities for your community in December, and a Girls' Empowerment Camp in early 2017 hosted by students and faculty from Nakhon Ratchasima Rajabhat University.


Earlier this year I had an opportunity to introduce a free and web-based computer programming activity, Hour of Code, to schools in my community. The idea behind Hour of Code is very simple: Introduce students of all ages and abilities to computer programming through puzzles based on popular games, shows or movies. Participants start with simple goals and as they progress, the puzzles get increasingly more difficult. This year, one of the goals of T4D is for every PCV site to include at least one activity from the Hour of Code during Computer Education Week, **5-11 December 2016**. We recognize that some of you may not have experience with coding or are unsure how and where to start, so we are currently hard at work creating lesson plans for you to use, as well as helpful keyword lists for each puzzle in English and Thai. We will distribute these resources via the [wiki](https://sites.google.com/site/pcthailandwiki2/) closer to the event, but we encourage anyone interested to start looking around [code.org](https://code.org/) to check out what the website and Hour of Code activities have to offer.

This semester we began a partnership with professors from the Faculty of Education, Educational Technology and Innovation Program at Nakhon Ratchasima Rajabhat University to begin an English, Technology and STEM project for 3rd and 4th year university students. This collaboration came about after a brief guest lecture on the Hour of Code and STEM activities in the classroom, which led to discussions about possible future activities and an exchange of project proposal ideas. As the students’ progress through the project timeline they will receive hands-on training of basic computer programming concepts, prepare lesson plans, and practice teaching with their peers. In later stages, they will learn how to incorporate life skill activities into their teaching and camp facilitation. All this will lead up to the Girls' Empowerment Camp early next year. To date, 57 students have been selected to participate in the initial project and have completed several courses in computer programming concepts. They will begin assisting weekly guest lectures on computer programming and Hour of Code activities during the months of September and October, and they'll serve as Thai speaking technical support for your counterparts during the Hour of Code event in December. The feedback from the students and faculty has been overwhelmingly positive and they are looking forward to sharing the Hour of Code activities with their peers. In fact, the response has been so overwhelming that Nakhon Ratchasima Rajabhat University has requested we increase the original goal of introducing 200-250 students to Hour of Code to over 700 students from the Faculty of Education!

The final piece of the project is a **Let Girls Learn** based Girls' Empowerment Camp focusing on technology. The objective of **Let Girls Learn** is to give girls opportunities to improve their chances of success and continue learning. Girls are historically underrepresented in computer science and other STEM fields, and as Volunteers we have the potential to reach hundreds of students and link them to computer science and STEM activities and opportunities. Together with a renewed focus on providing a solid foundation for future activities in PCV communities, the Girls' Empowerment Camp aims to expose and inspire Thai girls to use technology in a fun environment, and in a way that is engaging and easy to learn. The main feature of the camp will be introducing students to Scratch 2.0, a block programming language very similar to the Hour of Code activities. Additionally, we hope to create a community of students who will share and collaborate as they learn and try new projects and computer programs. With help from teachers and Peace Corps Volunteers we will start preparing participants to become leaders of computer clubs in their schools and communities. There will be games, life skills activities, and all around camp fun with university students serving as councilors and facilitators. We look forward to continuing to develop ideas and cannot wait to see what great things will happen both during and after.

This is an exciting time to be a Peace Corps Volunteer in Thailand. The **Let Girls Learn** initiative has opened many new opportunities for PCVs to participate in camps and other activities geared towards increasing Thailand's technological development. The T4D team is excited about moving out from behind the scenes and being a more active part of these activities. Peace Corps worldwide is also engaging more with technology and sharing ideas with Volunteers about how they can utilize tech in their communities and projects. As we continue to grow and learn from each other and from other Peace Corps countries, we cannot wait to see what you may dream up and complete in your communities. We invite you to start thinking about technology, STEM, and the Hour of Code events, as well as other ways in which you can give your students the opportunity to play, learn and grow through technology.



# No Internet, no power, no problem. Solar library empowers schools abroad
September 7, 2016
Region: IAP
Post: Micronesia
project: Micronesia - SolarSPELL
Source: https://fullcircle.asu.edu/faculty/solar-library-empowers-schools-abroad/

Many islands in the Pacific Ocean lack two things that are essential for accessing information and performing educational pursuits: a library and the internet.

*Laura Hosman, a new assistant professor at Arizona State University, created SolarSPELL: a digital library that generates its own Wi-Fi signal and solar power. Photographer: Pete Zrioka/ASU*

Without this access many teachers are without strong lesson plans or curriculum and community members lack books and multimedia.

But a new Arizona State University faculty member has figured out a way to deliver a digital library that doesn’t depend on existing internet connectivity —rather it comes with its own Wi-Fi hotspot.

Laura Hosman is an assistant professor who began a joint appointment in ASU’s Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering and the School for the Future of Innovation in Society this semester.

Her innovative device, the Solar Powered Educational Learning Library, known as SolarSPELL, is a digital library full of educational resources that generates its own Wi-Fi signal and solar power. All that is needed to access the information is an internet-capable device, such as an iPad, laptop or smartphone. Basically, it’s a self-powered plug-and-play kit, portable enough to fit into a backpack.

The plastic case containing the technical components is waterproof and weatherproof, and covered with a compact solar panel.

The real genius of the device lies in its small, durable, credit card-sized computer — known as a Raspberry Pi — that is used as a server and delivers the educational content over its own Wi-Fi hotspot.

“The server is one directional, so the Wi-Fi doesn’t connect to the internet, but it serves up our offline library in the form of a website, so it looks and feels as though you’re online,” explains Hosman.

## Curating localized content

On the SolarSPELL website are thousands of educational resources, including videos, ranging from math and English lessons to agricultural information to overviews of climate change.

*SolarSPELL’s educational library is accessed using an internet-capable device, such as an iPad, laptop or smartphone. It operates like a self-powered plug-and-play kit. Photographer: Pete Zrioka/ASU*

Just like a community library, SolarSPELL can be a hub for people of all ages — from young children looking to watch instructional videos to community members looking to improve their agricultural practices.

In curating the content, Hosman insists on including as much localized information as possible. Currently, most educational content available to Pacific Islanders is provided by the governments of the U.S., Australia or New Zealand, and is not localized at all.

“When identifying content for SolarSPELL we try to think like a Pacific Islander, with a goal in the future of empowering locals to create their own unique content,” she says.

This means the device has a dual purpose of teaching things like science and geography, but also preserving and communicating local, traditional and indigenous knowledge. One example, preserved and accessible in the device, is a series of more than 70 Micronesian Seminar videos that cover 100 years of Pacific Islands history.

The importance of providing localized content came to Hosman several years ago during what she refers to as “a light bulb moment.”

“I was showing a Micronesian Seminar video to a teacher and student, and their amazement at seeing the country’s president on the screen made me realize that these two had never actually seen a Micronesian — someone who looked like them — in a video before,” says Hosman. “It makes a huge difference if you can see yourself and your culture in the curriculum.”

## Integration with Peace Corps

SolarSPELL has a strong working relationship with the U.S. Peace Corps in Vanuatu, Micronesia and Samoa. Peace Corps volunteers in the Pacific Islands are stationed at remote, rural schools for two years, and have a mission to teach English and where possible, technology in the schools.

“SolarSPELL provides a synergistic approach to the Peace Corps volunteers’ educational responsibilities, particularly when introducing technology into schools for the first time,” says Hosman.

She has learned that introducing technology in rural areas is only successful when the instructors are both technically proficient and embedded in the local community — a perfect fit for Peace Corps volunteers who know the local educational environment.

“It can take a long time to change the locals’ mindsets and skillsets toward using technology. But Peace Corps volunteers are tech savvy and are integrating SolarSPELL into schools in a successful way,” she says.

There are more than a hundred SolarSPELL devices in the Pacific Islands, with 90 devices being managed by active Peace Corps volunteers.

## A future at ASU and beyond

In January, Hosman will be taking SolarSPELL to Tonga for the first time. She is working with four engineering students in the Polytechnic School, one of the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering, on curating content specific to Tonga and creating hands-on lesson plans for teaching about solar power.

With the help of ASU students she says SolarSPELL will continue to evolve and improve — from enhancing the library’s website features to identifying more cost-effective assembly methods and components to potentially coordinating a SolarSPELL build day on location in the Pacific Islands with teachers or high school students.

*Laura Hosman is working with engineering students in the Polytechnic School to introduce the device to Tonga in January 2017. From left to right: James Larson, electrical engineering junior; Laura Hosman, assistant professor; Bruce Baikie, engineering mentor and implementation manager/lead; Tyrine Jamella Pangan, software engineering junior; and Miles Mabey, robotics engineering junior. Photographer: Pete Zrioka/ASU*

Hosman says the project seems to “exponentially expand” with student interest and enthusiasm. “What’s exciting is I don’t know what direction it will take next because ASU has an unlimited outlook and mentality,” says Hosman.

Long term, she hopes to see the device’s use expanded to all islands with Peace Corps volunteers, and then beyond.

“With time and dedication from ASU students it could go across Africa and Asia,” she says.

Lofty aims like expanding SolarSPELL’s reach around the globe is what attracted Hosman to ASU.

“Teaching innovative concepts at a school that’s number one in innovation in the country is the dream,” says Hosman.

She was attracted to the Polytechnic School for their project-based classes, especially with engineering students. “At many schools, engineers learn a lot of theory, but don’t get their hands busy … yet being able to tackle hands-on projects is a main reason why many of these students became engineering majors,” she explains.

Hosman has taken previous students to Haiti, Micronesia and Vanuatu. She says bringing students into the field to see their work take fruition is a life changing experience that alters their trajectory from there on out.

It looks like Hosman has found a perfect home for herself, her device and her passions in the Valley of the Sun.

“ASU supports social justice, inclusivity, hands-on teaching and multidisciplinary learning. It’s a perfect fit because that’s what I’m all about.”



# Let Girls Learn Computation Class
November 11, 2016
Region: IAP
Post: Peru
Source: http://thepetersonsnewgroove.tumblr.com/post/153043347759/let-girls-learn-computation-class

I just wanted to share an update on the Girls in Technology class that I helped to start in the high school. We started classes last month, and so far have had great participation from the teachers and the students. We’ve already seen progress in their confidence in using the computers, even though we’re at the most basic level still. Keep in mind most of these girls don’t have a computer at home, so even just providing a space where they can discover things on their own is beneficial to them. Photo below is from the very first class:

I’m really excited to see how far these girls will go in furthering their education, and so happy that the community supports this project. Let Girls Learn focuses on providing quality education to all girls around the world in order to reach their full potential. Ensuring that girls receive an education is one of the most effective ways to advance a country’s development. It has been proven to end cycles of poverty and improve health outcomes. To quote President Obama,

> “The single best indicator of whether a nation will succeed is how it treats its women. When women have health care and women have education, families are stronger, communities are more prosperous, children do better in school, nations are more prosperous…. If you want your country to grow and succeed, you have to empower your women.”

The Let Girls Learn initiative is only a year and a half old, but I personally see the positive changes that some of my fellow volunteers have made in their sites. In Cutervo, which is only about an hour away from us, a fellow volunteer started a Student Soup Kitchen so that students who study far from their homes have a place to eat lunch. She was the first Peace Corps Peru funded LGL project. And over in Ancash, a volunteer from our Peace Corps group is currently raising money for a women’s empowerment group that focuses on knitting. If you’re interested in supporting him through donations, here’s the [link](https://donate.peacecorps.gov/donate/project/womenas-club-of-ancash-womenas-empowerment/). Keep in mind that in order to receive an LGL grant, the communities have to provide at least 25% of the proposed budget. This ensures that these are community-led projects, and not just volunteer driven, so that these projects continue long after the volunteer has finished their 2 year service.

I feel really proud that Peace Corps Peru has partnered with the Obamas’ Let Girls Learn initiative. Regardless of political beliefs, I think we can all agree that women all over the world deserve to be provided an equal education. The effects of gender inequality are real, they exist, not just in developing countries but in the U.S. as well. This initiative is making tangible differences that combat gender inequality in developing countries, which in turn positively affects our nation. With the U.S. government about to begin a new administration, I hope that the Let Girls Learn initiative continues so that it, and young girls, can reach their full potential.



# Tonga Peace Corps Embraces the SolarSpell Digital Library
December 20, 2016
Region: EMA
Post: Tonga
Source: https://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com/2016/12/20/tonga-peace-corps-embraces-the-solarspell-digital-library/

A team of students and faculty from Arizona State University (ASU) traveled to Tonga the second week of December 2016 to deliver their portable ruggedized solar-powered digital library for use in schools and communities across Tonga. The [SPELL](http://solarspell.org/), or Solar Powered Educational Learning Library, is self- (solar) powered and generates an offline Wi-Fi hotspot that delivers thousands of books, videos and educational content, much of which is specially curated for the Pacific Islands. The team delivered training to 16 US Peace Corps volunteers who teach in the local schools for two years, most as English-language teachers.

The day’s activities consisted of an overview of the history of the development and implementation of the SolarSPELL project; training on how to use the SolarSPELL’s hardware and software; a scavenger hunt to familiarize volunteers with the library’s content (with SolarSPELL t-shirts as prizes); a brainstorming session on how volunteers could use the SolarSPELL itself to collect stories from their communities and counterparts as well as to create new, localized educational content.

The team received email feedback from one volunteer the day after the training:

I just want to thank you for today. I know we were all really excited by the wonderful new technology and teaching possibilities, but I was really blown away by this project. You guys have really “thought of everything”. Working in a Developing country is challenging, but seeing your perseverance to deliver something you’re passionate about is inspiring in itself. I may be a “new” volunteer here, but I can’t wait to hit the ground running using this great new tool in my teacher tool box. I love the student involvement and the evolution of it all, and how simple you made it. This will be an amazing asset to me for my next 2 years– Thank you!

This implementation with the US Peace Corps in Tonga expands the SolarSPELL’s footprint to four Pacific Island nations, with prior deployments in Vanuatu, the Federated States of Micronesia, and Samoa. It is also the first SolarSPELL deployment that saw the team working in tandem with ASU’s library staff. Not only did ASU Assistant University Librarian Lorrie McAllister travel with the team and lead part of the Peace Corps training, the [SPELL’s content rich website](http://pacificschoolserver.org/) debuted a new, streamlined design that was developed in conjunction with a team of staff from ASU’s library, led by Deirdre Kermis.



# Thailand - Let Girls Learn - Girls Empowerment: Technology
January 13, 2017
Region: EMA
Post: Thailand
project: Thailand - Hour of Code
Source: https://donate.peacecorps.gov/donate/project/girls-empowerment-technology/

The Girl's Empowerment: Technology 2017 Project is a multi-phase plan aimed to expose as many Thai youth, teachers and future teachers to computer science in a way that is fun and creative, ultimately culminating in a 4 day/4 night Girls Empowerment camp/training experience. 40 girls aged 12-13, 10 Thai counterparts, 10 Peace Corps Volunteers will be drawn from communities throughout Thailand.

Each day of the camp will consist of activities, lessons and games dedicated to developing youth leadership, gender equality, problem solving, critical thinking, planning and the importance of persevering through challenges. Planned sessions will include technical instruction using Scratch 2.0 computer programming language, development of life skills through Right to Play, and women in technology career fields. Activities and lessons addressing these learning areas align closely with Thailand's nationwide youth development goals.

In an effort to increase the opportunity for young girls in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), Girls Empowerment: Technology Project 2017 will reach beyond the confines of the one-time training. In addition to increasing the participating youths' knowledge across the aforementioned goal areas, the project will also increase counterpart and youth leadership capacity, provide necessary skills to support and sustain the project within the individual participating communities, and engage more host country entities in the planning and implementation of the project, allowing for ongoing engagement after completion of the camp itself with a community-based technology club.

This project has been designed to expand access to education for girls in Thailand as part of the Let Girls Learn Program. Learn more at letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov.

Your contribution increases the impact of Ms. Wirt, her fellow Peace Corps Volunteers, and their communities; and makes a brighter future possible for young women in Thailand.



===== Alumni =====

Serving in the Peace Corps provides invaluable experience to the Volunteers themselves, and it gives them confidence, humility, and insights that they carry with them to their next challenges and careers.

These stories of alumni highlight that beyond the more famous Reed Hastings examples (CEO and Founder of Netflix, Swaziland RPCV), there are countless examples of Returned Peace Corps Volunteers making use of their experiences using ICTs during their service.



# Dot-Com's Dirge Is Peace Corps' Jubilation
August 13, 2001
Source: http://www.informationweek.com/dot-coms-dirge-is-peace-corps-jubilation/d/d-id/1011466

The Peace Corps has found gold in the dot-com bust. Displaced IT workers are a prime source of new volunteers.

What has been a depressing time for IT workers in the dot-com sector has been exactly the opposite for the Peace Corps. Although the governmental volunteer organization doesn't have any statistics yet on the impact the flood of displaced dot-commers is having on volunteerism, it reports that applications and phone calls from prospects are up significantly.

Nowhere is the interest rising more than in the areas around Boston, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C., all of which have two things in common: a large IT industry presence and a Peace Corps office.

The San Francisco office has been running its own ad campaign targeting displaced dot-commers for the past few months. Press director Ellen Field says out-of-work Internet workers represent a logical target for the Peace Corps, which typically relies most heavily on educated people in their twenties to fill its volunteer ranks. Young, single professionals are most likely to be willing to live in remote locations for two years, which is the Corps' minimum time commitment.

According to Field, the dot-com bust has helped to lift the Peace Corps out of a volunteering slump that began 20 years ago. The volunteer count--nearly 7,500--is at its highest level since the early 1970s. Field admits that one of the primary drivers of displaced IT professionals' interest in volunteering may be disillusionment after seeing riches come and go so quickly. "Perhaps working for the dollar doesn't have as much meaning," she says.

But for those who aren't willing to give up two years or would prefer to work on IT projects rather than teach English or dig irrigation ditches, there are other options, such as the 18-month-old Geekcorps. The brainchild of dot-com veteran Ethan Zuckerman, Geekcorps--which on Monday merged with the 36-year-old International Executive Service Corps--offers techies the chance to volunteer for IT projects in developing countries for as little as three months. Zuckerman, former VP of R&D for Tripod Inc. before it was acquired by Lycos Inc., says Geekcorps was founded as a reaction to the Peace Corps and its lengthy commitment requirement, which can come with a price. Says Zuckerman, "By the end of two years, your skills are out of date."



# A Brooklyn Inventor Eases an African Headache
September 14, 2002
Region: AF
Post: AF
Source: http://www.nytimes.com/2002/09/14/nyregion/14cart.html

For centuries, women in rural Africa have carried heavy loads on their heads as they take goods to market. But a man in Brooklyn thinks he has a better way, and — as far-fetched as it may seem — people in one African nation have begun to listen.

Arnold Wendroff, an itinerant inventor who worked in the Peace Corps and later studied in Malawi, has designed a wooden handcart to relieve the burden there.

Slightly larger and more stable than a wheelbarrow, the handcart can be easily built using native materials and two bicycle tires. It is also cheaper to make and more practical than a bicycle. Best of all, a woman can carry far more in the cart that she can on her head.

The carts are now being used not only to replace head-borne baskets, but also to haul trash in Malawi's capital, Lilongwe, to carry produce in remote provinces, even to ferry sick people to hospitals. Politicians are paying attention, and Western development experts speak admiringly of Dr. Wendroff's efforts.

It is a sweet vindication for Dr. Wendroff, a 60-year-old with a bristly beard who spent years crisscrossing Malawi like an evangelist, talking about his handcart to anyone who would listen.

There is nothing exceptional in the cart's design, Dr. Wendroff is quick to point out. The latest model is based on sketches in a book he bought at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.

But in a region where the work force has been devastated by AIDS, the need for cheap and practical alternatives to what is known as "head-loading" is immense, said Prof. John M. Staatz, an expert in African agriculture and transport issues at Michigan State University. Much of the continent still lacks the money for such longer-term solutions as more cars and better roads.

"It is really of great importance," said Jephthah Chagunda, the director of the Malawi Rural Travel and Transport Program, which is financed by the World Bank and recently bought and distributed 16 handcarts in a pilot project. About 65 carts are in use in Malawi, with more being built by a farmers' association and by the Lilongwe City Assembly.

For Dr. Wendroff, the handcarts are just one part of a decidedly eccentric career. He is an occasional research associate in the geology department at Brooklyn College.

He got a Ph.D. in sociology by studying witchcraft and traditional medicine in Malawi in the 1980's There is no patent on the handcart design, and Dr. Wendroff said he made no money from the handcarts. He said he lived off a modest pension and a small inheritance.

"This will revolutionize the way they live, because they have to get their own water and firewood every day," Dr. Wendroff said recently outside his Park Slope home. He was sitting comfortably in one of his handcarts as a visitor wheeled him on a demonstration tour from his brownstone to Prospect Park, half a block away. With his 150-pound frame balanced in the cart, he seemed as light as a feather.

Still, the handcarts have not been an easy sell.

The concept first dawned on Dr. Wendroff in 1989, when he was helping a friend clear some land in the Catskills. Later that year, in Malawi, he showed pictures of American garden carts to farmers, who were eager to buy them. But the cart's steel axles were unavailable there.

In 1992, Dr. Wendroff returned to Malawi with wheels and axles, traveling the countryside and trying to persuade government ministers, nonprofit groups and others to manufacture carts. Everyone was enthusiastic, but no one built them.

In 1998, he finally succeeded in persuading the Malawi minister of agriculture to hold a handcart demonstration. A favorable report followed, and two years later he met with the president of Malawi, Bakili Muluzi, which resulted in some favorable publicity in Malawi. But still no carts.

He redesigned the cart in wood, making sure it could be built and repaired with local materials like castoff bicycle screws. Nuts and bolts that can be bought at any American hardware store are extremely rare in Africa, he explained.

"It's so simple," he said as he led a visitor to his basement workshop in Brooklyn. He laid out the tools required to build a handcart: saws, hammer, screwdriver, brace, tape measure, square, plane, and countersink.

Simplicity, as it happens, was part of the problem.

Unlike Asia, where bicycles and rickshaws have been mass-produced for decades, Africa has always looked to the West, where motorized transport and roads were the model.

There has been a "deep-seated stigma associated with handcarts, as they are considered a technological retrogression," said Peter Njenga, an Africa-based analyst for the International Forum for Rural Transport Development, in an e-mail message. But the fact is that there is no money to pay for more advanced methods.

Now, history may finally be turning Dr. Wendroff's way.

"There's been a recognition that they need simpler means of transport in the short term," said Stephen Brushett, an economist at the World Bank, which has been criticized for favoring giant development options like highways and dams.

There has also been a recognition that traditional African head-carrying has a price. Although studies have shown that African women have developed a special gait to deal with the loads they carry on their heads, many have suffered spinal injuries from excessive burdens in recent years, Mr. Chagunda said.

During Dr. Wendroff's latest trip to Malawi, in June, several nongovernmental groups ordered carts and expressed interest in helping distribute them throughout the country. Eventually, he hopes to take the idea to the rest of the continent.

Dr. Wendroff trained a number of Malawian carpenters to make the carts. The parts and labor to build a cart cost about 3,000 kwacha, or about $40, a lot of money in a country where the annual per capita income is $190. But other methods are far more expensive: an ox cart costs about $400 (without the ox).

In Lilongwe, the City Assembly has begun using the carts for garbage collection and street cleaning (replacing the wheelbarrows that were used previously). They are being used as ambulances by a rural hospital in Chitedze. The officials who worked with Dr. Wendroff in Malawi have been sending him follow-up questions by e-mail.

"The women love it, and best of all, they're suggesting improvements," Dr. Wendroff said. "It really seems to be catching on."

Dr. Wendroff has even learned something about salesmanship. On his last trip, he noticed that despite their poverty, Malawians spend money on perfumed soap, because of the sexy billboards advertising the soap in Lilongwe. Could something similar be done for handcarts?

"We don't have money for advertising," he said. But he has decided that naming it the Livingstonia cart — after the 19th century colonial explorer — may have been a mistake. "Now we're thinking of calling it the Africart," he said.

Doing research? Search the archive for more than 500,000 articles: Today's News Past Week Past 30 Days Past 90 Days Past Year Since 1996



# A Social Solution, Without Going the Nonprofit Route
March 5, 2009
Region: AF
Post: Benin
excerpt: A highlight on Sam Goldman, founder of D.light, replacing kerosene lamps with solar-powered lamps.
Source: http://nyti.ms/1s7mqpf

It used to be that people who wanted to solve a social problem — like lack of access to clean water or inadequate housing for the poor — created a charity. Today, many start a company instead.

D.light, a company cofounded by Sam Goldman, who spent four years in the Peace Corps in Benin before earning a master’s degree in business from Stanford University, is an example. Mr. Goldman started D.light with the mission of replacing millions of kerosene lamps now used in poor, rural parts of the world with solar-powered lamps.

Having used kerosene lamps himself while living in Benin, Mr. Goldman learned firsthand of kerosene’s problems — it is expensive, it provides poor light and it is extremely dangerous. When the son of his West African neighbor nearly died after suffering severe burns from spilled kerosene, Mr. Goldman said he realized he wanted to create a venture to solve both the social and economic problems caused by these lamps. His time in Benin also convinced him, he said, that only as a business could a project become large enough to reach the great number of people who use these lamps as their primary source of light.

“We could have done it as a nonprofit over a hundred years, but if we wanted to do it in five or 10 years, then we believed it needed to be fueled by profit,” he said. “That’s the way to grow.”

Since the company incorporated in May 2007, it has raised $6.5 million from a combination of investors who, Mr. Goldman said, are able to push the company on both its social mission and its profitability.

What to call these innovative businesspeople is the subject of some debate. The terms “social entrepreneur” and “social businesses” are generally used to characterize people and businesses that bring entrepreneurship to ventures that have a social mission. Yet there are those who would limit the social entrepreneur label only to those without any profit motive. A separate, but related, category are companies referred to as “socially responsible.” These are generally companies whose core business does not necessarily have a social mission, but who display socially responsible characteristics, like environmental sensitivity.

Because of the difficulty of defining these social ventures, it is hard to gauge the exact number of them, but there are indications that there is increasing interest in the idea of using business to tackle the world’s big problems. Last year, 630 people attended a new conference, Social Capital Markets, on social venture investing. According to Kevin Jones, the creator of the conference and a principal in Good Capital, an investment firm focusing on social business, two-thirds of the participants signed up after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which he called a sign that people are flocking to what he calls a “new asset class.”

Experts concede that not all social problems respond well to the for-profit model. One example could be early childhood education. “If you set it up as a business, you might be able to raise money more quickly and grow more quickly,” said David Bornstein, the author of “How to Change the World” (Oxford University Press, 2004), an often-cited book on social entrepreneurship. “But if you want to be profitable, you might find that you have to make choices that diminish the quality of your program and then children won’t learn to read as quickly. While Stanley Kaplan can make a fortune selling education to well-heeled people, providing the same services to low-income kids would probably not provide a very good income.”

Mr. Bornstein said it came down to one crucial question: “As you grow, will the economics of your business work in favor of your mission or will they work against it? In the case of providing access to [solar energy](http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/science/topics/solar*energy/index.html?inline=nyt-classifie) for people in villages, the bigger you get, the cheaper your product will be, so the economies of scale make sense.”

Conchy Bretos, too, chose a for-profit model for her venture. While working as Florida’s secretary for aging and adult services, Ms. Bretos learned of the difficulties that force older people to leave their homes and move into nursing homes for lack of proper care.

With a partner, Ms. Bretos started the MIA Consulting Group, a business that advises governments as well as private housing developers on how to bring assisted living services cost-effectively to low-income housing communities so that older people can be cared for in their own homes.

Ms. Bretos said that a business was the natural model for their venture. “We came from a strong business background and we developed a business plan,” Ms. Bretos said. “By doing that, we discovered that we were offering something that no one else was offering. We got our first client even before we incorporated and within a few hours we had to form a company to be able to put together a contract. It was just easy to form an S corporation.”

Ms. Bretos said she also had to make a living. “In this nation, we equate success with profit,” she said. “We wanted to be profitable while also doing something that was right and giving back to the community.”

Advisers who work with these kinds of companies say the rise in social business reflects the times. “Historically, social and legal norms tended to recognize and treat for-profit and progressive social or environmental motivations and activities separately,” said Jonathan S. Storper, a partner at the law firm Hanson Bridgett who specializes in sustainable and socially responsible business. “These lines have blurred and converged as the business world attempts to respond to the modern culture’s demand that businesses be good stewards of the environment and society.”

Still, there are legal issues to consider. The basic analysis, Mr. Storper said, is whether the organization’s primary goal is to maximize shareholder profit or to benefit the public. “If the primary goal is to benefit the shareholders, then the legal structure should maximize the ability to create wealth,” he said. “While nonprofits have advantages, such as an exemption from paying taxes and the tax deductibility of donations, nonprofit activities are restricted to its charitable purpose.”

He noted that the government and the public “generally are less able to scrutinize the operations and finances of for-profit businesses.” But, he added, “The mission of an organization may benefit from the broad public involvement and support inherent in nonprofit organizations.”



# 7 Rules of Design From MIT's Guru Of Low-Tech Engineering
September 30, 2009
Region: AF
Source: http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/design/a3395/4273680/

**1\. Try living for a week on $2 a day.** That's what my students and I do when I teach my class about international development. It helps them begin to understand the trade-offs that must be made when you have only very limited resources. More broadly, it was in the Peace Corps in Botswana that I learned to carry water on my head, and noticed how heavy the bucket was; and I learned to pound sorghum in to flour and felt the ache in my back. As a designer, I came to understand the importance of technologies that can transport water or grind grain.

**2\. Listen to the right people.** Okay, so you probably don't know what it's like to carry fifty pounds of firewood on your head. Well, don't pretend that you do. Talk to someone who has done it. I believe that the key to innovation in international development is truly understanding the problem, and using your imagination is not good enough.

**3\. Do the hard work needed to find a simple solution.** As Leonardo da Vinci said, "Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication"--and it is the key to this type of design work.

**4\. Create "transparent" technologies,** ones that are easily understood by the users, and promote local innovation.

**5\. Make it inexpensive.** My friend Paul Polak has adapted a famous quote to the following: "Affordability isn't everything, it's the only thing" and there's a lot of truth in that. When you are designing for people who are earning just one or two dollars a day, you need to keep things as cheap as you can and then make it even cheaper!

**6\. If you want to make something 10 times cheaper,** remove 90 percent of the material.

**7\. Provide skills, not just finished technologies.** The current revolution in design for developing countries is the notion of co-creation, of teaching the skills necessary to create the solution, rather than simply providing the solution. By involving the community throughout the design process, you can help equip people to innovate and contribute to the evolution of the product. Furthermore, they acquire the skills needed to create solutions to a much wider variety of problems. They are empowered.



# The One About My Community's Emergency Medical System
August 26, 2011
Region: IAP
Post: Panama
project: Panama - Community Emergency Medical System
Source: http://bronwenraff.blogspot.com/2016/03/the-one-about-my-communities-emergency.html

This story is a throwback to my service in the Dominican Republic, but on the anniversary of our very first week of providing emergency medical care with the Paramedic team in Manzanillo, I thought it fitting to document our process in the annals of history. Enjoy!

One sunny afternoon, I was sitting with my neighbors drinking coffee in our plastic chairs trying to catch a breeze. I had been in site for nearly six months and felt that I had a pretty good grasp on the dynamics of the place. The hospital administrator rolled up to our growing street gathering and took his place in the low-back plastic chair on the corner. “Bea,” he said to me, “I need a favor. We need an ambulance for the hospital, can you get us one?”

Fast forward to nearly two years later, and I never did get that hospital administrator his ambulance, but what we did do together as a community was create an emergency medical system staffed by local first responders who use a basic mobile phone software to provide pre-hospital care to emergencies in my site of Manzanillo in the northwest corner of the Dominican Republic. But let’s back up!

After that fateful conversation I had that afternoon with the hospital administrator, fondly known as Papito, I started investigating the idea of an ambulance donation. I did a Google search and sent a mass email to friends and family back home. I also sent many emails to organizations I read about online and one finally took the bait! Little did I know, this connection would turn into a full-blown emergency response system project (and subsequently sour me at the idea of ambulance donations as legitimate forms of aid). I heard back from Trek Medics International, an organization dedicated to “improving emergency medical care anywhere.” And so I began a series of intense conversations with the Executive Director, Jason, who pushed me for more specific answers to my “can you donate an ambulance” question. As it turned out, when I dug a little deeper within my community, I teased out from the hospital administrator that what we really needed was a collaborative solution to the actual problem of inadequate pre-hospital care and a lack of reliable inter-facility transfer capacity.

So, I’d found the jackpot organization that could help me tackle this – now what? After a series of conversations between community members, we unanimously agreed to invite Trek Medics to send a team down to investigate the possibility of starting a pilot program. One thing led to another and the big boss, Jason, decided that Manzanillo was the perfect place to launch their newly developed Beacon technology (essentially a way to crowd-source transportation and medical attention, like emergency Uber). Working under the supervision of the local fire department, we gathered recruits who had to interview, study, train, and perform simulations for several weeks before we allowed them to “graduate” as community first responders. Simultaneously, I was training local dispatchers and working with the fire chief, Ramoncito, to give the fire station a central role in the new service as dispatchers of local emergencies.

The team of responders (fondly referring to themselves as “paramedicos”) also had to prove themselves as reliable partners with real skin in the game. For example, they initially offered to help the local civil defense during Holy Week and stationed themselves for service at the beach when the holiday crowds flocked to Manzanillo’s beaches. There they encountered a number of patients with problems ranging from wounds to dehydration and intoxication. While no serious patients were treated (thankfully), their simple presence on scene proved to be a small, but critical first step in their growth: it showed the community that the response team was more than just a good idea, it built their confianza (trust) in our new service exponentially.

Then, we had to start giving our responders bigger tests so that we knew we could safely grow. This included: handling simultaneous emergencies; ensuring that a sufficient number of available first responders were distributed equally as the coverage area expanded; training our team members as instructors in order to train neighboring communities, introducing a new version of the Beacon software funded by Google, and learning to use newly minted motorcycle ambulances the organization donated to our local fire station. And on and on it went...one good idea snowballing into a thousand more - all community-driven to make a well-oiled emergency medical system.

There is still so much to do, but for something that started as a simple conversation over much-too-sugary coffee, it is now the primary method for emergency transport in my rural community. Today, six months from the date I finished my service in the Dominican Republic and have moved on to a similar Peace Corps Response position in Panama, we still have a fully functioning emergency medical service in Manzanillo and have expanded (with help from USAID and other generous organizations) to the entire province. Locals are the crux of the organization and run the entire operation. This was a project that never would have functioned without a vested community interest (especially as I knew nothing about first aid myself before it started!). Key community members were part of every decision and the driving force excited about this organizations entry into Manzanillo. After initial contact with Trek Medics, I became a critical community organizer, but I was never the driving force. As Jason reminded me various times throughout the process, “We can’t want it more than they do. They have to be a part of every step.” A very valuable life lesson, indeed, especially in the realm of international development.



# An Inside Look at the Tech Awards: Technology Benefiting Humanity
September 19, 2011
Source: http://www.forbes.com/sites/rahimkanani/2011/09/19/an-inside-look-at-the-tech-awards-technology-benefiting-humanity/

Recently, I interviewed David Whitman, vice president at [The Tech Museum](http://www.thetech.org/) in Silicon Valley, where he directs its signature programs, including [The Tech Awards](http://thetechawards.thetech.org/): Technology Benefiting Humanity. In collaboration with the Uffizi Gallery and Museo Galileo in Florence, Whitman coordinated The Tech Museum’s international exhibition on Leonardo and other artist-engineers of the Renaissance. For 14 years, he managed U.C. Berkeley’s famed Hertz Concert Hall. Later, he assisted in establishing Art Basel Miami Beach. An independent writer and photographer whose work has appeared in more than 100 publications and exhibitions, Whitman often travels abroad and has resided in Belgium, Brazil, and as a Peace Corps forester in the West Indies.

Rahim Kanani: Explain a little bit about the founding and motivation behind The Tech Awards.

David Whitman: Eleven years ago, The Tech Museum partnered with the Center for Science, Technology, and Society at Santa Clara University and Applied Materials to create an international program recognizing innovative people who develop “technology benefiting humanity.”

The 5 categories for The Tech Awards—environment, economic development, education, equality, and health—were derived from the U.N. Millennium Development Goals in 2000. And later, the Global Humanitarian Award was established.

Each year, 15 laureates are selected, from among hundreds of competing applicants, in an independent review conducted by the Center for Science, Technology, and Society. Since its inception, The Tech Awards has inducted 245 laureates and awarded $2.75 million in unrestricted cash prizes.

We bring The Tech Awards laureates to Silicon Valley for a week of activities designed to expose them to potential funders, social entrepreneurs, corporate executives, media, researchers, students, and many others. We commission films about the laureates, hold workshops, offer speaking and networking opportunities, connect laureates to Silicon Valley mentors, and present a public Showcase, Conference, and Gala. As a tranquil escape from these intensive activities, in recent years Nokia has treated the laureates to an airship ride over the San Francisco Bay.

The high point of The Tech Awards Week is the Gala. It’s one of Silicon Valley’s most important and most beautifully staged events. World-class photojournalists and photo agencies contribute images that are projected onto an immense screen half a football field long, bringing the world into the Gala, magnificently. The legendary photography editor Karen Mullarkey is the force behind this element of The Tech Awards.

Naturally, The Tech Awards is also shaped by personal experiences. As former Peace Corps volunteers, the program’s co-founder, Dick King, and I have experienced first-hand many of the conditions that inspire The Tech Awards laureates to take action. At last year’s gala, as he paid tribute to the program’s other co-founders, Dick told a moving story. When he arrived in his Salvadoran village, one of the first neighbors to befriend him was a timid, naked, malnourished, barefooted young child. Years later, the haunting memory of that boy, and the daunting conditions and poverty he had to endure, inspired Dick to help create The Tech Awards.

Rahim Kanani: What have been some of the examples of winning technologists or organizations over the last decade?

David Whitman: All 245 laureates—including the 15 to be honored next month—are listed on our website,[thetechawards.thetech.org](http://thetechawards.thetech.org/). The diversity is staggering. Seattle-based PATH is a 3-time laureate of The Tech Awards. And often in the media these days is the phenomenal Khan Academy, one of the education laureates of 2009.

Recipients of the Global Humanitarian Award include [Queen Rania Al Abdullah](http://www.forbes.com/profile/queen-rania-al-abdullah) of Jordan, Al Gore, Muhammad Yunus, [Gordon Moore](http://www.forbes.com/profile/gordon-moore), [Bill Gates](http://www.forbes.com/profile/bill-gates), Kristine Pearson, and James C. Morgan in whose honor the award is named. The 2011 award will be given to social entrepreneur Jeff Skoll at The Tech Awards Gala on Thursday evening, October 20, at the Santa Clara Convention Center.

Rahim Kanani: In carving out the landscape, where do we currently stand with respect to the intersection of technology and social change?

David Whitman: Using your landscape metaphor, technology and social change seem, to me, like elements of a mighty thunderstorm. Thunderstorms alter the landscape with the forces of wind, rain, and fire. Depending on our perspective, these changes can be viewed as negative or positive—just like with social change. And as technology continues to change exponentially, the conditions leading to social change around the world are being created with corresponding speed and impact.

Rahim Kanani: Where are we headed?

David Whitman: My profound hope is that technology will help bring us closer together rather than creating technologically unequal worlds with all the tragic and enduring consequences that would generate. I also hope that humans will always be in control of technology rather than the alarming possibility of the reverse situation. Contemplating a world dominated by artificial intelligence is no longer science fiction. We are moving swiftly into a new realm.

Rahim Kanani: If you were to advise budding technologists about using their learned expertise towards social change, what would you say?

David Whitman: As Queen Rania said at the awards ceremony last year, “The Tech Awards laureates see technology’s potential and promise, putting their talents to work for others as leading techmanitarians.”

Become a techmanitarian. Consider others, especially those outside your usual circles. The world is far more complex, mysterious, and diverse than most people experience. Consider how your innovations can be truly meaningful. Imagine someone for whom your innovation would have a positive and perhaps life-changing impact. Be a force for good. Truly use technology to benefit humanity…and all other life forms, too.



# Astronaut and RPCV Joe Acaba Compares Peace Corps Service to Living in Space
January 1, 2013
excerpt: Computer group training in Vanuatu
Source: http://files.peacecorps.gov/multimedia/pdf/media/pctimes2013*01.pdf

Astronaut and RPCV Joe Acaba Compares Peace Corps Service to Living in Space Astronaut and returned Peace Corps Volunteer Joe Acaba visited Peace Corps headquarters on December 7 as the keynote speaker for “Pasos Adelante: Hispanic Innovation in Action,” an event sponsored by the Peace Corps Office of Diversity and National Outreach. Acaba’s speech was followed by a panel discussion highlighting the importance of diversity and innovation in an increasingly connected world.

“Peace Corps will always be a part of who I am. Serving in Peace Corps is just like living in space: You are working with people, away from your family, in a new environment, and you are occasionally faced with uncomfortable situations. I was just as affected by my service in Peace Corps as my time in space,” said Acaba. “Being in Peace Corps, you learn to adapt, to communicate effectively, and to be creative—all 21st century skills that really got me to where I am today.”

Acaba served as a Peace Corps Volunteer in the Dominican Republic from 1994–96 as an environmental education awareness promoter. Acaba has spent 138 days in space during two missions, most recently returning in September. He is recognized as the first NASA astronaut of Puerto Rican descent.

In addition to Acaba, the panel included Maria Elena Vivas-House, a senior executive director of the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities National Internship Program; Patricia Leon-Guerrero, the managing director of national Latino initiatives for Teach for America; and Alejandra (Manuela) McDonough (Panama, 2003–2005), who oversees the National Council of La Raza’s health programs.

McDonough, who served as an environmental health Volunteer in Panama, credits her Peace Corps service for leading her to work in the public health sector.

“It was my experience on the ground, in the communities, that really sparked my interest in working in public health.”

Currently, there are more than 600 Peace Corps Volunteers of Hispanic origin serving worldwide.



# From South Florida to Southeast Africa: Local Educator Bringing Robots
May 26, 2014
Region: AF
Post: Burundi
Source: "http://articles.sun-sentinel.com/2014-05-26/news/fl-south-florida-to-burundi-adventure-20140519*1*robots-south-florida-chemistry"

The U.S. State Department warns Americans not to go there, but Don Chambers says he can't wait to get to Burundi next month.

He's got a mission: to start setting up a school.

For the past two years, Chambers, 57, has been running his Pompano Beach-based Greenbot Company, which does robotics education workshops for kids in local schools. But now, he says, the time is ripe to bring his brand of science, technology, engineering and mathematics education more than 7,500 miles across the globe to the Burundi American International Academy in Southeast Africa.

Innovations have now made it possible to open the doors of technology and the wonders of the Internet even where electrical power currents don't run consistently or with the kind of juice Americans expect, Chambers says.

"A year ago we couldn't have done this," he says, tooling around with a gizmo that makes it possible to run a computer server on 5 volts. (Most American homes run on about 120 volts.)

All three stories of the Burundi American International Academy have been built near Lake Tangangyka in Burundi's capital of Bujumbura. Chambers is hoping he'll hear the sound of 200 students, pre-kindergarten through sixth-grade, running through the halls where he will be headmaster come September.

"I worked there in the Peace Corps," said Chambers, who has two master's degrees, on in chemistry and one in chemistry education, from Columbia University. "I've always dreamed of going back."

For Freddy Kaniki, a Burundi native who now works as a pharmacist, investing in this school – and hiring Chambers – is what he felt drawn to do after living through Burundi's 12-year civil war, which ended in 2005. His father and two brothers were killed in the country's ethnic violence.

"(I wanted to) invest in a school to plant the right seed in the younger generation," Kaniki said in an email from Burundi.

Chambers was hired after a friend recommended him and Kaniki came to South Florida on a two-day visit.

"My choice of Don was based mostly on his values," Kaniki said. "During those two days (visiting South Florida) my role was to talk to Don, his wife and his sons about their values and beliefs. I was very much satisfied as I was satisfied on a professional side."

Chambers, his wife and three sons will be setting off for Burundi's distant shore on June 9 so he can start finishing all the opening work. These past few weeks, he and his family have been loading up a container full of his own robotics equipment and literally a ton of other stuff donated by the community.

[Palm Beach County](http://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/local/palmbeach/) Schools donated environmental science, math and reading books. The Miami-Dade School District is sending nursing supplies, books and classroom science kits.

Richard Newman, a resident of [Boca Raton](http://www.sun-sentinel.com/community/news/bocaraton?track=tax-bocaraton) who collects robots, has been working every contact he has in the robotics world to get supplies for the effort. He's assembled 200 robotic soldering kits from PARALLAX Company.

"It's a pleasure for me to help kids on the other side of the planet," he said.

Chambers started his career as one of Columbia University's first Peace Corps fellows, teaching science in the inner city of New York. Before and after that, though, the lure of foreign lands has always kept him moving. He came to South Florida after his gig teaching robotics in Tokyo, Japan was interrupted by the 2011 earthquake and tsunami.

Bringing his family across the globe to set up a school in one of the five poorest countries where just one of every two children go to school doesn't faze Chambers. He's going to have at least 100 computers at the school – he can set them up for $35 each, he said.

Chambers said he is convinced that opening a private school, registered in the United States as a nonprofit, that appeals to the middle class is one of the missing pieces in a Southeast African country. Toyota is setting up in that country, he pointed out.

"Toyota is betting on it," he said. "They are probably seeing the beginnings of development."



# Sustainable impact: Former Student Recounts Lessons Learned at Penn State
October 16, 2014
By Erick Seo
Region: AF
Post: Namibia
Source: http://news.psu.edu/story/330559/2014/10/16/academics/sustainable-impact-former-student-says-mehta-prepared-him-success

When he came to Penn State in 2009, Erick Seo brought with him a heartfelt passion for humanitarian work. Throughout his teenage years, he had traveled on several short-term mission trips. Seo explained, "Most of my volunteer service had been religious oriented, so when I came to Penn State, I wanted to find out if there were other avenues I could explore."

He was introduced to the Humanitarian Engineering and Social Entrepreneurship (HESE) program by an upper-class student who had shared his experiences from a recent journey to Kenya. Seo said, "After we talked, I started attending classes through the HESE curriculum."

In no time, Seo came to realize the intensity of the program. He traveled to Kenya for three weeks during the summer of 2012 and saw firsthand the impact of HESE projects. He explained, "I was on the field for the venture Mashavu, meaning 'chubby cheeks' in Kiswahili. It represents healthiness and growth. Mashavu is designed to combat the inaccessibility of primary healthcare. Because primary healthcare is so expensive and time consuming, people weren't able to fully get treatment without risking financial instability. They would have to take off work and travel far distances, only to find that their ailment was a common cold."

In order to confront this, Seo and his team designed a system of entrepreneurial community health workers who provide pre-primary health services in rural areas. He was able to witness the traction this kind of service offered and the appeal to the community. "Every day, between one and two-hundred people came to utilize this service. Not only did this experience highlight the impact it had on the recipients, but it also benefited the local Kenyans that operated the venture. They were punctual and eager, clearly showing they were excited to be a part of something meaningful."

Seo said all of their ventures were partnered with the Children and Youth Empowerment Center, located in Nyeri, Kenya. Though he wasn't able to see all of the projects' fruits of labor firsthand, he was able to deduce, just from the excitement and the participatory attitude of the Kenyan coworkers, that the impact of the HESE projects was tremendous. "The experience in Kenya radically changed my opinion of what it means to be humanitarian, and I saw how a well-planned project with a sustainable business plan can yield significant results."

Not long after his return to the United States, Seo decided he wanted to go back to Africa. He recalled, "The Peace Corps seemed like an excellent option. I applied that fall, which also happened to be the first semester of my senior year."

Putting his studies on hold, Seo returned to Africa, where he remains dedicated to promoting sustainability. "Khanjan Mehta, director of the HESE program, emphasized the importance of sustainability more than anything else. This is the most crucial piece of knowledge I learned from him and the program, and I have been making that my mission for every project I work on."

He is currently designing a community college in Namibia. Seo said it's the first of its kinds and is very unique, even in the vastness of Peace Corps projects. "My site is the Tate Institute of Technology. The project was initially designed as a school for the deaf and disabled however it soon evolved into the Glowdom Community College."

The project has been visited by Namibia's president, Hifikepunye Pohamba, and by Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki Moon.

Seo said he sometimes regrets that he never completed his bachelor's degree. "I am considering taking classes through Penn State's World Campus to finish."

For now, he continues to hold wishful thoughts for the future of his projects. "HESE classes equipped me with the appropriate mindset to achieve success. I feel I must give credit where it is due, so I want to thank Khanjan for his tutelage.



# Corps to Career: From Robotics Student To Social Entrepreneur
November 24, 2014
Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20151231173841/http://passport.peacecorps.gov/2014/11/24/corps-to-career-from-robotics-student-to-social-entrepreneur/

*Peace Corps was excited to participate in the 2014 [Global Entrepreneurship Summit](http://gesmarrakech2014.org/en/home) taking place in Marrakech, Morocco, November 19-21, where we helped the U.S. government promote economic and social entrepreneurship around the world. This post highlights one way that Volunteers promote entrepreneurship every day.*

As a Volunteer in rural Mexico, Sam Bhattacharyya saw the problems his community faced, experienced those problems firsthand and, as a result, truly understood them. Now he's working to solve these problems for his community — and the rest of the developing world. After wrapping up his service, Sam is now pursuing an MBA at MIT with the intention of growing two of his secondary projects into social enterprises.

A few years ago, Sam was pursuing a PhD in robotics from Vanderbilt University when he realized he wanted to put his knowledge to more practical use and have a positive impact. That was when he remembered the photos his high school physics teacher, an RPCV from Senegal, showed him. So, he decided to leave academia and apply to Peace Corps.

His technical skills made him an ideal candidate for the Peace Corps program in Mexico, even though he had no experience with Spanish. A few months later he found himself partnered with an astrophysics research center teaching students in rural Mexico. Shortly after, he began to settle in and integrate into his community.

Sam made more Mexican friends and gained more connections in Mexico. One of these connections was the director of a local NGO that was focused on providing support and services to people with disabilities in the local area (including economic skills training, providing a support network etc.), including making low-cost prosthesis (see example above). The director asked Sam to help because of his background in robotics, and Sam became an integral part of the team. While still in Peace Corps, he worked with the NGO to start a workshop to make prosthesis that "are functional enough that a United States Veteran can use them and a Mexican Middle School Teacher can afford them."

According to Sam, a project like this is extremely necessary in Mexico because there is no economic safety net for the injured or ill. Furthermore, diabetes is a huge problem in Mexico and contributes to a large portion of the amputations in the country. Much of Mexico's economy is informal, so by giving people the ability to get back to work with functional prosthesis, they are also getting the ability to recover their economic livelihood and help Mexico develop. Now, Sam and the founder of the NGO are branching out and starting a for-profit business to manufacture low-cost prosthesis on a larger scale in order to reach and help a much larger market.

As a teacher in rural Mexico, Sam also noticed that he hit a brick wall when trying to integrate technology in the classroom. He realized that online learning systems would be a great asset to his students, but also found that he lacked something critical to implementation: reliable internet. But he didn't just give up trying to use technology in the classroom. Instead, he created a type of file that would allow his students to benefit from technology based classes without actually having to be online.

The file basically works like an mp3 file. When they have a Wi-Fi connection, students can download a file to their cell phones and then, without Wi-Fi, they can open it anywhere (on the bus, at home, etc.). Therefore they can watch educational videos and take quizzes on a topic practically anywhere they go.

Sam realized this is a powerful tool that could be useful far beyond the Mexican village he was working in. Giving anyone with a cellphone access to these files can be extremely useful in education and development, especially because so many people have cell phone now, and they don't necessarily have a reliable internet connection. So, Sam is also working on bringing this program to as many people as possible.

According to Sam, PCVs have an amazing advantage in solving important problems in the world today. But, he also recognizes that many people with the skill set and knowledge necessary to solve these problems aren't spending enough time actually learning about and experiencing these problems. His suggestion? That people with the technical experience go out of their comfort zone and volunteer. Beyond that he also encourages RPCVs who have spent two years working to find innovative solutions and to diversify their skillset as much as possible to enter the professional world. In a society that emphasizes such high levels of specialization, maybe diversifying is actually the better way to solve the pressing issues in the world.



# One Coder's Journey To Use His Skills For Social Good
January 27, 2015
Region: IAP
Post: Guyana
excerpt: This developer and teacher proves there are many ways you can do what you love and social good at the same time.
Source: http://www.fastcompany.com/3041387/one-coders-journey-to-use-his-skills-for-social-good

My husband Craig Dennis started off his career in software development going down the traditional route. But he realized early on he wanted to use his skills for good. He committed to taking the nontraditional path, and though it's taken him to some unexpected places, he has always tried to remain true to it.

Craig's journey proves that having a niche skill and a desire to do social good doesn't mean there's only one job or path out there for you.

## A Vital Lesson Early On

Craig attended college for a while at Arizona State University, but he soon realized the computer classes were dated and that he was studying material he knew wasn't actually happening in the real world. So he dropped out of college and spent a lot of time in Barnes and Noble reading books and learning from people he worked with.

From there he went on to work for various tech and consulting companies. At one point early on in his career the consulting firm he worked for placed him at a credit card company to consult on workflow.

The credit card firm had Craig sit with a group of women doing data entry to see how he could help them. He wrote some code to automate 80% of what these women were doing. Then he came in one day and the lights were all dark in their area. They no longer had jobs.

"I wasn't happy with that," Craig says. "My boss said—and this sticks in my mind to this day—'You better get used to this feeling because this is your job—to automate people out of their jobs so the bottom line increases.' It was right then I started thinking I needed to find something better to do with my skills."

## Something Better

Craig began to think about the Peace Corps, and it turned out that year the Peace Corps was introducing a technology program. It seemed like a sign to Craig, so he signed up and a year and a half later was stationed in New Amsterdam, Guyana.

In the Peace Corps, Craig worked for a technical institute where he helped build a computer lab and, along with other volunteers, wrote a countrywide curriculum that could be used at the other three technical institutes. He also taught full-time students and working adults.

"I'd never taught before. It was very shoot from the hip," Craig says. "Watching those kids get it was so cool. These were kids who needed confidence more than any other thing I taught them."

Craig still keeps in touch with many of his students, some of whom went on to work repairing computers, writing software, and running a successful electronic store.
When Craig returned to the States, he knew that staying on this path of social good was important to him.

"I had felt what it means to do fulfilling work and I didn't want to give it up," he says. "You spend so much time at work. If you don't believe in what you're doing, what's the point?"

## Coding For Good

Eventually Craig and I moved to New York City when I got a job at Idealist. During our company holiday party, Craig sat next to Idealist founder and executive director Ami Dar, and it turned out he was interviewing Craig without his knowing it.

"I was telling him I had found a place to teach working adults and I was thinking about doing it," Craig says. "But Ami talked a good game about how if I worked for Idealist, every day I'd be using my code skills for good. The next day he offered me a job. I took it because I knew I could catch up on the tech I'd missed out on while I was in the Peace Corps, while also being fulfilled."

For seven years Craig worked at Idealist growing the development team and wearing many hats. "It was a good run," he says.

During a two-month sabbatical, which all Idealist employees are encouraged to take after seven years, Craig and I went to the Philippines where we saw people struggling. "I sat a lot on the beach just thinking about what access to technology could do in a place like this," he says. "And I kept seeing a quote on all the schools about teachers being the key to the future. It was a sign that I should really teach. It had been seven years and I was still thinking about it."

While in the Philippines Craig was trying to learn a new coding language, and he signed up for a website full of online courses called Treehouse. Their mission of wanting to provide affordable, accessible technology to people everywhere lined up with where his heart was, Craig says. When we returned to the United States, Craig found a job opening for a teacher position in their Portland office. He went through a long process of interviews and got the job.

## Leaving One Great Job For Another

Despite his excitement about jumping back into teaching, there was a part of Craig that was hesitant about leaving his comrades at Idealist. "Nothing is ever finished, and there are parts of the code base I knew I was leaving for someone else to struggle with even though I knew they'd eventually get it."

"But I did a lot of mentoring during my later years at Idealist, and I knew that they all knew I was a teacher and would want this for me," he says.

To other developers hesitant about taking the leap and using their skills for good, Craig has two words: "Do it."

"We are needed so badly in that world," he says. "Take advantage of this time when there are these jobs out there where you can feel good about yourself. If you're doing stuff you believe is unethical in your heart, you're part of the problem. Don't be."



# Joseph Conrad Brings 3d Technology To Low Resource Health Care
February 19, 2015
By Cindy Long
Region: AF
Post: Zambia
Source: http://www.centre.edu/joseph-conrad-99-brings-3d-technology-low-resource-health-care/

Malaria is a major health threat, especially for those in regions of the world without access to advanced health care. But Joseph Conrad ’00, a research assistant professor with the Wright Research Group at Vanderbilt University, is part of an international team using 3D printers to research and develop enhanced rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) for the disease.

Similar in function to a home pregnancy test, malaria RDTs are simple devices used to quickly diagnose infection without sophisticated lab facilities. They are developing technologies that improve the sensitivity of existing rapid tests to provide clear diagnosis of malaria even in the absence of symptomatic infection.

“Existing rapid diagnostic tests are designed to detect the presence of a protein in a small volume of blood,” Conrad explains. “The protein is produced by malaria parasites as they grow, and it’s a specific marker of infection. In individuals with high numbers of parasite in their blood, there is a high concentration of the protein. In individuals with low numbers of parasite in their blood, there isn’t so much protein, and the rapid diagnostic tests have trouble identifying its presence in the small volumes of blood they are designed to assess.

“Our approach and device use magnetic beads to capture the malaria protein from a relatively larger blood specimen than can be used in an RDT alone,” he continues. “The magnetic beads with the protein attached can then be collected using a strong, external magnet and deposited directly onto a commercially available rapid diagnostic test. The test can then be developed normally. Our device facilitates both the chemical and physical steps in this specimen processing routine. It produces positive test results at much lower levels of malaria protein than a rapid test without enhancement.”

Malaria RDTs are often used to quickly screen for malaria infection, and while they are efficient to use in places where microscopes or DNA testing aren’t easily accessible, the rapid tests aren’t sensitive enough to detect very low levels of malaria.

In countries like Zambia where malaria control efforts are advancing, individuals with symptomatic (high-level) malaria infection are being successfully identified and treated for the illness. However, with existing tests, individuals with asymptomatic (low-level) disease may be left undiagnosed and can continue to transmit malaria to others. Conrad and other members of his team at Vanderbilt intend to fill this gap by improving the sensitivity of the tried and true malaria RDTs to identify low-level infections.

Their international team is housed within the Vanderbilt-Zambia Network for Global Health Technologies (VZNIGHT), a post-doctoral research and training program. Conrad works closely with a resident researcher, Priscilla Lumano-Mulenga, a VZNIGHT Fellow and a Zambian physician and infectious diseases specialist. Together, using 3D printer technology, these researchers can fast-track device design in advanced laboratories and deploy designs to rural Zambia where they can perform field trials in realistic conditions.

“We believe we’re one of the first groups to implement device design and field testing in low resource settings using 3D printing technology,” Conrad says. “Because Nashville doesn’t have endemic malaria, our development and field testing teams are separated by long distances and difficult logistical connections. Device design typically uses an iterative ‘design, test, re-design, repeat’ sort of approach. In the case of low resource diagnostic technologies, this often results in devices that work well in nicely appointed laboratories and then fail to perform from the back of a motorcycle in rural areas.

“We don’t aim to revolutionize this design paradigm, but the practicalities of work spaces in different hemispheres means that there could be a ton of time between iterative steps. Using 3D printers in both spaces, we can design and test a device in our Vanderbilt labs as well as print and concurrently test the design in the field in Zambia. Receiving feedback and integrating it into subsequent redesign steps can move at the speed of email rather than the speed of FedEx.”

Malaria isn’t the only disease that can be combated with this technology. With funding from the Fogarty International Center at the National Institutes of Health, Conrad is expanding work on this device to include HIV rapid tests for early infant diagnosis. Others are developing applications for rapid Ebola diagnostics. Their work is also supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

“My global health work began as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Zambia where I contributed to a variety of HIV and AIDS education efforts, and I’ve been fortunate to have opportunities throughout my research training to work in low resource settings from Haiti to China to Zambia. Training in HIV Immunology and epidemiology and global health provide useful context for our ongoing efforts to develop low resource diagnostics. But my academic career in international, biomedical research really has its roots in the Centre College classrooms and offices of Young, Olin and Crounse and the BMB and International Relations courses I took there.”



# Corps to Career: Social entrepreneur uses technology for grassroots change
April 14, 2015
By Mike Buckler
Region: AF
Post: Malawi
excerpt: Going from Malawi to building a startup.
Source: https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories/corps-to-career-social-entrepreneur-uses-technology-for-grassroots-change/

Peace Corps Malawi was the most influential experience of my life.

It was incredibly hard emotionally, and sometimes physically, but it exposed me to a new reality (one with a lot less artifice and window dressing) and allowed me to confront the truth of developing country life in a very intimate way. The challenge also helped me turn inward and take a deep, honest look at myself and ways that I could improve as a human being. Peace Corps is definitely not an experience for the faint of heart or the emotionally guarded. It's about facing down fear, overcoming challenges, and finding out who you really are on the inside and as a human actor on this planet.

My development philosophy is definitely informed by what I saw during Peace Corps and, additionally, what I didn't see. I saw problems, but I didn't see things getting better for my community or the communities around me. I lost students and colleagues to treatable diseases; I cringed at the sight of malnourished children and crippled adults. Yet, among the local people, I also saw a lot of grit, resilience, community spiritedness and intellect. It was clear that these folks were victims of circumstances beyond their control. It was also clear that very few international development decision makers took local people seriously. They were viewed as a problem to solve, not a resource to embrace.

Village X, a social enterprise in Washington, D.C., is our attempt to change the narrative. We created our flagship product – the Village X app – to turn restaurant meals and online shopping into much-needed donations for small-scale, community-led, transparent projects in Africa, starting in Malawi and Ghana, and eventually in the U.S. The app allows users to get a discount, give some savings to a chosen grassroots project and see direct impact through live picture updates provided by recipients, together with Facebook friends.

Consumers experience physiological "highs" from saving and giving. Why not put these two highs together and make everything transparent? Our app is turnkey cause marketing for local restaurants and online retailers interested in providing what customers repeatedly demand but rarely get from corporate social responsibility (CSR) campaigns – transparent impact.

Someone recently described our app as Groupon, Etsy and Kiva rolled into one. Another suggested that we call the app "Giving Social," referencing D.C. deal company Living Social. While I'm not enamored with these comparisons, I'm flattered that folks think we have a big idea that can scale, touching millions of shoppers, businesses, and villagers and supporting thousands of projects. That's definitely our goal.

Friends of Village X, our affiliated 501(c)(3) nonprofit, employs all the grassroots development lessons we learned during Peace Corps service. We work only with villages recommended within our trusted grassroots network because we want to collaborate with committed, ambitious recipients. Villages choose, plan, partially finance, implement and document projects, building confidence and capacity, with oversight from Friends of Village X country representatives. Village residents do all the work and reap the lion's share of benefits. Eighty-five percent of each donation actually reaches the ground for direct project costs.

The most important thing I learned in Peace Corps drives this unconventional approach: people make sense when you take time to understand them. Within the context of their everyday environments, and personal histories, people generally exhibit behaviors that seem appropriate, if not rational. Taking time to appreciate the unfamiliar in others is hard and involves literally walking in their shoes and studying their environments, including language, culture and history. It's grueling, but the resulting enlightenment is worth it.

These lessons are literally embedded in the DNA of Village X. We know that grassroots development is hard, but we have helped local people accomplish it successfully and will continue to do so, hopefully on a much larger scale. Our strategy for scaling is to invite input and participation from the Peace Corps network, a community of over 200,000 people with an unrivaled wealth of grassroots development knowledge and expertise. Together, we can put local people first.

As cultural and linguistic specialists who live and work among local people, Peace Corps Volunteers are the special forces of international development. Like military special forces, Peace Corps Volunteers and their insights often lurk in the shadows after service, falling on deaf ears of the status quo. That needs to change. It's time for Americans directly to experience faraway places and the people who inhabit them, and technology makes this possible. The Village X app is just the beginning.


